EINSTEIN AND THE QUANTUM

EINSTEIN AND THE QUANTUM
THE QUEST OF THE VALIANT SWABIAN

A. DOUGLAS STONE

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS
PRINCETON AND OXFORD

Copyright © 2013 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, Woodstock,
Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
press.princeton.edu
Jacket photograph: Albert Einstein reading. Courtesy of The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem / Corbis Historical Images. Personality rights of ALBERT EINSTEIN are used
with permission of The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Represented exclusively by
GreenLight.
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Stone, A. Douglas, 1954–

Einstein and the quantum : the quest of the valiant Swabian / A. Douglas Stone.
pages
cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-691-13968-5 (hardback)

1. Einstein, Albert, 1879–1955. 2. Physicists—Biography. 3. Quantum theory. 4. Science
—History. I. Title.
QC16.E5S76 2013
530.12—dc23

2013013162

British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Verdigris MVB
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

This book is dedicated to my father, Alan, who has been my
intellectual inspiration, and to my wife, Mary, who has been my
emotional inspiration.

Science as something already in existence, already completed, is the
most objective, most impersonal thing that we humans know.
Science as something coming into being, as a goal, however, is just
as subjectively, psychologically conditioned, as all other human
endeavors.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN, 1932

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments ix
INTRODUCTION

A Hundred Times More Than Relativity Theory 1

CHAPTER

1

“An Act of Desperation” 5

CHAPTER

2

The Impudent Swabian 15

CHAPTER

3

The Gypsy Life 21

CHAPTER

4

Two Pillars of Wisdom 26

CHAPTER

5

The Perfect Instruments of the Creator 36

CHAPTER

6

More Heat Than Light 44

CHAPTER

7

Di cult Counting 51

CHAPTER

8

Those Fabulous Molecules 62

CHAPTER

9

Tripping the Light Heuristic 70

CHAPTER

10 Entertaining the Contradiction 80

CHAPTER

11 Stalking the Planck 86

CHAPTER

12 Calamity Jeans 94

CHAPTER

13 Frozen Vibrations 103

CHAPTER

14 Planck’s Nobel Nightmare 111

CHAPTER

15 Joining the Union 122

CHAPTER

16 Creative Fusion 129

CHAPTER

17 The Importance of Being Nernst 141

CHAPTER

18 Lamenting the Ruins 149

CHAPTER

19 A Cosmic Interlude 160

CHAPTER

20 Bohr’s Atomic Sonata 168

CHAPTER

21 Relying on Chance 181

CHAPTER

22 Chaotic Ghosts 193

CHAPTER

23 Fifteen Million Minutes of Fame 204

CHAPTER

24 The Indian Comet 215

CHAPTER

25 Quantum Dice 228

CHAPTER

26 The Royal Marriage: E = mc2 = hν 241

CHAPTER

27 The Viennese Polymath 254

CHAPTER

28 Confusion and Then Uncertainty 268

CHAPTER

29 Nicht diese Töne 279

Appendix 1: The Physicists 287
Appendix 2: The Three Thermal Radiation Laws 291
Notes 295
References 319
Index 325

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project began after I gave several public lectures at
Aspen and at Yale on Einstein, Planck, and the beginning of
quantum theory, when it became clear that most of this story was
completely unknown both to the interested layman and to most
working physicists. While several eminent historians of science, T. S.
Kuhn, Martin Klein, Abraham Pais, and John Stachel for example,
have written excellent but relatively technical works analyzing
various facets of Einstein’s work on quantum theory, no book for the
general reader had attempted to synthesize all this into a complete
picture. I have tried to ll that void with this book, while making it
a fun read along the way. The book is based on the Collected Papers
of Albert Einstein and the large body of outstanding historiography
that has been produced on the history of quantum theory, blended
with material from a number of biographies of Einstein, with a
particular debt to the recent ones by Albrecht Folsing and Walter
Isaacson. While I chose not to footnote quotations in the text, all
their sources are identi ed in extensive notes at the back of the
book.
I want to thank the late Martin Klein for his encouragement at
the very early stages of this project, and Walter Isaacson for his
generous advice and assistance, which was so important to a rsttime author. I am very grateful to my editor, Ingrid Gnerlich, for her
critical reading of the manuscript and useful guidance, and to
Deborah Chasman, who made key suggestions for improving my
initial draft. I also want to thank Samantha Hasey and Eric Henney
at Princeton University Press, who helped with the nal stages of
preparation for publication. Barbara Wollf at the Albert Einstein
Archive of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem was very generous
with her advice and experience relating to the copyright permissions

I was seeking, and Andy Shimp helped me navigate the library
systems at Yale and retrieve di cult-to- nd items. Both my father,
Alan Stone, and my wife, Mary Schwab Stone, read the work with a
keen eye and helped me immeasurably, not the least in keeping up
my enthusiasm for the project. My son, Will Stone, found time
between his journalistic pursuits to work as my editorial assistant in
assembling the nal version of the manuscript.

EINSTEIN AND THE QUANTUM

INTRODUCTION

A HUNDRED TIMES MORE
THAN RELATIVITY THEORY
“Let’s see if Einstein can solve our problem.” This was not
an idea I had ever entertained, much less verbalized, during my
previous twenty-six years doing research in quantum physics.
Physicists don’t read the works of the great masters of earlier
generations. We learn physics from weighty textbooks in which the
ideas are stated with cold-blooded logical inevitability, and the
history that is mentioned is sanitized to eliminate the passions, egos,
and human frailties of the great “natural philosophers.” After all,
since physical science (we believe) is a cumulative discipline, why
shouldn’t we downplay or even censor the missteps and
misunderstandings of our predecessors? It is daunting enough to
attempt to master and then extend the most complex concepts
produced by the human mind, such as the bizarre description of the
atomic world provided by quantum theory. Wouldn’t telling the real
human history of discovery just confuse people?
Thus, while I had studied history and philosophy of science
avidly as an undergraduate, I had not read a single word written by
Einstein during my actual career as a research physicist. I was of
course aware that Einstein had contributed to the subject of
quantum physics. Even freshman physics students learn that
Einstein explained the photoelectric e ect and said something
fundamental about the quantized nature of light. And both atomic
and solid-state physics (my specialty) have speci c equations of
quantum theory named for Einstein. So clearly the guy did something
important in the subject. But the most familiar fact about Einstein

and quantum mechanics is that he just didn’t like it. He refused to use
the theory in its nal form. And troubled by the fundamental
indeterminism of quantum mechanics, he famously dismissed its
worldview with the phrase “God does not play dice.”
Despite its esoteric-sounding name, quantum mechanics
represents arguably the greatest achievement of human
understanding of nature. By the end of the nineteenth century
progress in physical science was stymied by the most basic problem:
what are the fundamental constituents of matter, and how do they
work? The existence of atoms was fairly well established, but they
were clearly much too small to be observed in any direct manner.
Hints were emerging from indirect probes that the microscopic
world did not obey the settled laws of macroscopic Newtonian
physics; but would scientists ever be able to understand and predict
the properties of objects and forces so far from our everyday
experience? For decades the answer was in doubt, until a theory
emerged, a theory that has now withstood almost a century of tests
and extensions. That theory has wrung human knowledge from the
deep interior of the atomic nucleus and from the vacuum of
intergalactic space. It is the theory that most physicists use every
day in their work. This is the theory that Einstein rejected. Thus
most physicists think of Einstein as playing a signi cant but still
secondary role in this intellectual triumph.
I might have continued with this conventional view of Einstein
and quantum physics for my entire career, if not for a coincidental
intersection of my own research with that of the great man. I am
interested in quantum systems, which if they were not microscopic
but were scaled up in size to everyday proportions, would behave
“chaotically.” In physics this is a technical term; it means that very
small di erences in the initial state of a system lead to large
di erences in the nal state, similar to the way a pencil,
momentarily balanced on its point, will fall to the left or right when
nudged by the smallest pu of air. I was searching (with one of my
PhD students) for a good explanation of the di culty that arises
when mixing this sort of unstable situation with quantum theory. I

recalled hearing that Einstein had written something related to this
in 1917 and, almost as a lark, I suggested that we see if this work
were relevant to our task.
Well the joke was on us. When we nally got our hands on the
paper, we quickly realized that Einstein had put his nger on the
essence of the problem and had delineated when it has a solution,
before the invention of the modern quantum theory. Moreover,
Einstein wrote with great lucidity about the subject, so that it
seemed as if he were speaking directly to us, a century later. There
was nothing dated or quaint about the analysis. For the rst time in
a long while, I found myself thinking, “Wow, this man really was a
genius.”
This experience piqued my interest in the actual history of
Einstein and quantum theory, and as I delved into the subject I came
to a stunning realization. It was Einstein who had introduced almost
all the revolutionary ideas underlying quantum theory, and who
saw rst what these ideas meant. His ultimate rejection of quantum
theory was akin to Dr. Frankenstein’s shunning of the monster he
had originally created for the betterment of mankind. Had Einstein
not done so, in all likelihood he would be seen as the father of the
modern theory.
This is not a view that one could extract from any of the popular
biographies of Einstein, where the focus is always on his
development of relativity theory. Nonetheless, I discovered to my
surprise that, for much of Einstein’s scienti cally productive career,
he was obsessed with solving the problems of quantum theory, not
relativity theory. He commented to his friend the Nobel laureate
Otto Stern, “I have thought a hundred times as much about the
quantum problems as I have about Relativity Theory.”
It is crucial to understand that while relativity theory is an
important part of modern physics, for most of us quantum
mechanics is the theory of everything. Quantum mechanics explains
the periodic table of the elements, the nuclear reactions that power
the sun, and the greenhouse e ect that leads to global warming. The
quantum theory of radiation and electrical conduction underlies all

of modern information technology. Moreover, quantum mechanics
has already subsumed part of relativity theory (the “special
theory”). The goal of modern string theorists and their wellpublicized “theory of everything” is to have quantum mechanics
gobble up all of general relativity as well. Since quantum mechanics
is the big kahuna, it behooves us to appreciate the role of Einstein in
the “other” revolution of twentieth-century physics, the quantum
one.
To understand Einstein’s seminal role in this revolution, it is
necessary to understand what had come before him. In this subject
he had exactly one predecessor, the eminent German physicist Max
Planck, of whom we will learn much below. Planck was the rst
major gure to recognize Einstein’s seminal 1905 work on relativity
theory, and he became Einstein’s greatest champion in the world of
science and one of his closest personal friends. But Einstein’s work
in the quantum theory—that was another matter. Sometimes it is
easier to recognize the genius that doesn’t paint in your own style.
Planck had not worked on the problems that were solved by
relativity theory, but he had worked on the quantum theory. In fact
Planck, not Einstein, is universally regarded as its originator, based
on his work on heat radiation in December 1900. Planck, a truly
admirable man of science, indeed achieved something of
incalculable signi cance as the new century began. But what it was,
and what it meant, are not as clear as the textbooks maintain.
At the moment that Planck was making his historic advance the
young Einstein, just graduated from the Zurich Polytechnic, was
coming to a bitter realization: he was not wanted in the world of
academic physics. Already engaged to his classmate Mileva Maric,
as his travails, both practical and scienti c, multiplied, he
maintained a bold self-con dence. This was exempli ed by a
humorous nickname he chose for himself in his letters to Mileva: the
“Valiant Swabian,” after the swashbuckling crusader-knight
invented by the Swabian romantic poet Ludwig Uhland. Einstein
had just submitted his rst research paper to the Annalen der Physik;
it was on liquid interfaces and proposed a novel (but simplistic)

picture of the forces between atoms. This would signify the
beginning of his lifelong quest to understand the laws of physics on
the atomic scale.

CHAPTER 1

“AN ACT OF DESPERATION”

On the evening of Friday, October 19, 1900, Max Planck,
the world’s leading expert on the science of heat, was experiencing a
physicist’s worst nightmare. Little more than a year earlier, he had
staked his considerable reputation on a theory that purported to
solve the outstanding problem of his eld: the relationship between
heat and light. Tonight at this meeting of the German Physical
Society, the hall lled by the men who had been Planck’s closest
colleagues for over a decade, another scientist would announce
publicly what Planck already knew—that the theory he had worked
on for the past ve years was almost certainly in error. This theory,
which built on the work of his close friend Wilhelm Wien, was
expressed in terms of a mathematical formula known as the PlanckWien radiation law.
One of the scientists who had discovered the failure of the
Planck-Wien law, Ferdinand Kurlbaum, was scheduled to speak rst
that night. A friend and close colleague of Planck’s, Kurlbaum had
no plan to attack Planck’s theory on mathematical or logical
grounds. Planck after all was the world’s greatest expert on this
topic and universally respected for his deep understanding of
thermodynamics (the physics of heat ow and energy). Kurlbaum
would simply present the hard data he and his collaborator, Henrich
Rubens, had painstakingly collected to test the predictions of the
Planck-Wien theory. The data would show (to quote Richard
Feynman) that “Nature had a di erent way of doing things.”
If Planck had been an experimenter himself, like Rubens and
Kurlbaum, his reputation would have been less in jeopardy on that
night. But Planck was a new breed of physicist, a theoretical

physicist, with no laboratory or instruments. The theorist’s job was
(and is) simply to predict and understand physical systems, from
stars and planets to atoms and molecules, using mathematical
deductions from known and accepted physical laws. Very rarely
(experience tells us about twice a century) theorists may also
successfully propose some amendments to the laws of physics; but
mostly they are master craftsmen, whose reputation depends on
how well they use their intellectual tools. There had of course been
great theory-building physicists before Planck: Isaac Newton, James
Clerk Maxwell, and Ludwig Boltzmann, to name three of relevance
to our story, but only at the end of the nineteenth century had the
division of labor been formally recognized by academe, and the
theoretical physicist, who divined nature by thought alone, became a
recognized species. When Planck had taken up his post at the
University of Berlin in 1889, it was the only chair of theoretical
physics in Germany, and one of only a handful in the world.
Because a theorist has no measurements to report and no
inventions to demonstrate, he is judged solely on whether his
theoretical predictions describe important phenomena and are
con rmed by experiment. An experimenter can go into the lab and
make a great discovery without necessarily knowing what he is
looking for, sometimes without even recognizing the discovery
when it is rst found. Many a Nobel Prize has been awarded for just
such serendipity. In short, a good experimentalist can also be lucky.
A good theorist, on the other hand, has to be right. Experimentalists
are playing poker; theorists are playing chess. Chess games are not
lost by “bad luck.” The problem for Planck that night was that he
had made a serious error in the contest with Nature, which was
being exposed by Kurlbaum just now as Planck waited for his turn
to speak. He needed to come up with an endgame that would
preserve, at least temporarily, his reputation as a theorist.
So what was the problem on which the estimable Professor
Planck had stumbled? It was the deceptively simple question of how
much a heated object glows. The great Scottish physicist James
Clerk Maxwell had demonstrated in 1865 that visible light and

radiant heat are di erent expressions of the same physical
phenomenon—the propagation of electrical and magnetic energy
through empty space at the speed of light. The di erence between
visible radiation (i.e., “light”) and thermal radiation is only their
wavelength. For light, that length is about one-half of a millionth of
a meter; for thermal radiation it is twenty times larger, or about ten
millionths of a meter (which is still about eight times smaller than
the width of a human hair). Such radiation arises when energy,
originally stored in atoms (matter), is emitted; it can then be
transmitted as an electromagnetic wave over large distances and be
reabsorbed by matter.1 In any enclosed space this happens over and
over until the electromagnetic (EM) radiation and the matter share
the energy in a balanced manner (they are “in equilibrium”).
Thus matter is continually emitting and absorbing radiation—all
objects are glowing, whether we can see their radiation or not. What
determines if we can see it is the temperature of the object; at room
temperature objects glow with primarily thermal (infrared)
radiation, a wavelength that our eyes can’t see (except with “nightvision” goggles). The red glow of heated metal appears when the
metal becomes hot enough to emit just a little of its EM radiation as
visible light. The surface of the sun, which is even hotter, emits
most of its radiation at visible wavelengths.
The central problem of the physics of heat, the one that Max
Planck had worked on for the past ve years, was to understand and
predict precisely, with a mathematical formula, the amount of
electromagnetic energy coming out of an object of a given
temperature at each wavelength. This formula is the law of thermal
radiation; physicists had known such a formula should exist for over
three decades, but nding the correct law and understanding it
theoretically had frustrated the best minds of the era. Einstein
himself commented somewhat later, “It would be edifying if the
brain matter sacri ced by theoretical physicists on the altar of this
universal [law] could be put on the scales; and there is no end in
sight to this cruel sacri ce!” In 1899, roughly a year and a half
earlier, Planck thought he had found the answer, and had proudly

announced his conclusions to the very same audience he was
scheduled to address this evening. At that earlier meeting he had
derived mathematically the equation that generated a universal
curve, or graph, with temperature on the horizontal axis and EM
energy on the vertical.
The current speaker, Kurlbaum, was presenting his and Rubens’s
measurements of just this curve, as Planck waited in the audience to
respond. The data made a neat straight line, showing that the
infrared energy radiated by an object increased proportional to the
increasing temperature. On the same graph the prediction of the
Planck-Wien law was plotted, giving a rainbow-shaped curve with
not even a passing resemblance to the actual measured data points.
Planck had known that this moment was coming. Rubens was a
personal friend, and he and his wife had visited Planck twelve days
earlier for Sunday lunch. As physicists are wont, Rubens began
talking shop and informed Planck that the law of thermal radiation
that Planck had defended ardently for the past two years was badly
out of agreement with their new data, which instead showed an
intriguing linear variation with temperature. It was on this rather
dramatic failure of his theory that Herr Planck would soon be asked
to “comment.” Thus the impending discussion showed every sign of
being exceedingly awkward.
Planck was no longer a young man, although he was famously
vigorous, and would climb mountains well into his seventies. At
forty-two his hair was receding above his piercing eyes, and it
sometimes pushed straight upward in an unruly shock. He had the
bushy handlebar mustache sported by many of his Prussian
colleagues and was dressed neatly in the academic style: white shirt
with high collar, black bow tie and jacket, and pince-nez glasses. As
a young man he had gone into science for the most idealistic of
reasons: “my decision to devote myself to science was a direct result
of the discovery that … pure reasoning can enable man to gain an
insight into the mechanism of [natural laws]…. In this connection it
is of paramount importance that the outside world is something
independent from man, something absolute, and the quest for these

laws … appeared to me as the most sublime scienti c pursuit in
life.” Early in his academic career he had been attracted to the
science of heat, thermodynamics, since it is based on two absolute
laws. The First Law states that heat is a form of energy, and the
Second Law governs the ow of heat and the possibility of
converting heat energy to do useful work, as in a steam engine. The
Second Law employs the mysterious concept of entropy (roughly
speaking, the amount of disorder in a physical system), and Planck
had based his career on the interpretation and applications of this
profound notion. That was why he was now in trouble.

FIGURE 1.1. Original data showing measurements of blackbody radiation energy (vertical
axis) as the temperature (horizontal axis) is varied while the frequency is xed compared
to di erent theories for the Radiation Law. The data points are represented by various
types of symbols, with the di erent types of dashed lines represent di erent theories. The
curve with the larger dashes outlined in gray represents Wien’s Law which disagrees
strongly with the data. The small dashes represent an empirical formula of no historical

importance. The dash-dotted line is the Raleigh-Jeans Law which works rather well for the
long wavelength (low frequency) radiation measured in this experiment (but which fails in
other experiments). The solid line is Planck’s Law, which ts the best and also works at
higher frequencies. The graph is from 1901, shortly after Planck proposed his law; in
October of 1900 he still believed that the Wien Law was correct. More details on the
Radiation Laws are given in appendix 2.

FIGURE 1.2. Max Planck in 1906, six years after he initiated the quantum revolution.
Courtsey Archiv der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Berlin-Dahlem.

Planck had not presented the Planck-Wien law of thermal
radiation as a conjecture, based on provisional assumptions that he
might revise. Quite the contrary. Little more than a year before,
standing in front of the very same group of physicists, he had
“proved” to them that this law followed from no other assumption
than the Second Law of thermodynamics. With crushing certainty he
had stated, “the limits of validity of this law coincide with those of
the Second Law of Thermodynamics.” This was the heavy artillery;
the Planck-Wien law was supposed to be as solid as the Second Law
itself! Einstein, also an admirer of thermodynamics, has said it is
“the only physical theory of universal content which, within the

framework of the applicability of its basic concepts, I am convinced
will never be overthrown” (and, so far, he has been right). So if
Planck, the world’s expert, said that he had derived the law of
thermal radiation directly from the Second Law, the case should
have been closed. Unfortunately for Planck, the data disagreed.
Thus, when Planck stepped to the podium that night, his aim
was not scienti c revolution but damage control. Nonetheless, he
was a truth seeker; he was not willing to run away from unpleasant
facts. Later he scorned the English theorist James Jeans for just such
behavior: “He is the model of the theorist as he should not be…,
[because he believes] so much the worse for the facts if they don’t
t.” Planck stood up and faced the music: “The interesting results of
long wavelength spectral energy measurements … con rm the
statement … that Wien’s energy distribution law is not generally
valid…. Since I myself even in this Society have expressed the opinion
that Wien’s law must be necessarily true, I may perhaps be
permitted to explain brie y the relationship between the … theory
developed by me and the experimental data.”
The “relationship” between them of course is that the PlanckWien theory is wrong; Planck could not quite bring himself to say
that in his remarks. But he did identify a weak point in his earlier
arguments and admitted that the Second Law of thermodynamics
does not have enough power, on its own, to answer the question.
There had to be some further new principle involved. Having lost
his guideposts for the journey, but being under such intense
pressure to come up with an answer, Planck did something highly
uncharacteristic. Planck was not a man to leap impulsively into the
unknown; by his own description he was “by nature … peacefully
inclined, and reject[s] all doubtful adventures.” Nonetheless, on that
October night he had decided to wing it. What followed was the
most fateful improvisation in the history of science.
Planck had been fortunate that his friend Rubens had given him
warning of the failure of his theory. Moreover Rubens’s data
provided a huge clue to what was wrong. Earlier experiments had
shown that the Plank-Wien law worked very well for visible EM

radiation emitted by very hot bodies, that is, for the shorter
wavelengths. The new experiments of Rubens and Kurlbaum showed
not only that the law failed for the longer, infrared wavelengths
emitted by less hot objects, but also showed exactly how it failed.
That nice, straight line in the data told Planck that at long
wavelengths, contrary to the prediction of the Planck-Wien law, the
radiation energy must be proportional to temperature. To Planck the
challenge was similar to lling in a line in a crossword puzzle for
which the end of the word was known, and now someone had lled
in the rst letter for him, telling him his original guess was wrong.
With a little inspired mathematical insight on the very Sunday
night, twelve days earlier, that Rubens had warned him of the
problem, Planck had guessed the correct mathematical formula for
the law of thermal radiation. Now, at the meeting, he unveiled his
new formula, soon to become immortalized as the Planck radiation
law.2 Moreover he took the liberty of sketching how his new law
compared to the Rubens-Kurlbaum data; it produced a line perfectly
matching the data points. He concluded, “I should therefore be
permitted to draw your attention to this new formula, which I
consider to be the simplest possible, apart from Wien’s expression.”
With this great leap of intuition Planck had achieved a draw, but
not a victory. Theorists are not supposed to just guess the correct
formulas to describe data; they are supposed to derive these formulas
from the fundamental laws of physics, which at the time were
Newton’s laws of mechanics and of gravity, Maxwell’s
electromagnetic theory, and the laws of thermodynamics. For
Planck’s new law to be anything more than a “curiosity” (as he
himself put it), he would have to connect it to the more general laws
of physics. As Planck himself said, “even if the absolutely precise
validity of the radiation formula is taken for granted, so long as it
had merely the standing of a law disclosed by a lucky intuition, it
could not be expected to possess more than a formal signi cance.
For this reason, on the very day when I formulated this law, I began
to devote myself to the task of investing it with true physical
meaning.”

The details of Planck’s new reasoning will be fully explained
later in our story. For the moment it su ces to say that after “some
weeks of the most strenuous work” of his life, “some light came into
the darkness,” and Planck again went before the German Physical
Society to justify his radiation law. In the course of that
presentation, on December 14, 1900, he uttered two sentences of
incalculable signi cance for humankind:
We consider, however—this is the most essential point of the
whole calculation—[the energy] E to be composed of a very
de nite number of equal parts and use thereto the constant of
nature h = 6.55 × 10−27 erg-sec. This constant, multiplied by
the frequency ν … gives us the energy element, ε.
Planck showed that, from this assumption and the thencontroversial statistical theory of atoms, his new law of thermal
radiation followed. But with this cryptic phrase natural science had
crossed a philosophical Rubicon: ultimately the exquisitely sharp
Newtonian photograph of the natural world would fall out of focus,
becoming blurred and uncertain. The even ow of natural processes
would give way to an atomic world of sudden jumps and collapses.
Light itself would become grainy, belying its wave properties, so
brilliantly wrung from the nineteenth-century triumphs of Maxwell
and others. And all who look to science to elucidate the universe
would have to get used to a worldview that sanctioned “spooky
action at a distance,” the modern quantum view of reality.
Planck’s insight was beyond brilliant; it was an act of genius. The
new law he introduced will bear his name and will be used by
scientists as long as there is technologically advanced human
civilization. In fact, as far as we know, it may be in use right now in
nonhuman civilizations.3 The theory that arose from this insight, the
quantum theory, is unquestionably the most important theoretical
advance in physical science since Newton.
So by December 1900 Planck had changed everything in physics
and chemistry. The only problem was he didn’t realize it. Planck

was still recovering from his near-death experience as a reputable
theorist. He later described his arrival at the quantum hypothesis as
“an act of desperation.” Now he breathed a deep sigh of relief and
put the “energy element” out of his mind: “I considered the
[quantum hypothesis] a purely formal assumption, and I did not
give it much thought except for this: that I had obtained a positive
result under any circumstances and at whatever cost.” And the
entire physics community went along with this denial, like a family
with an unspoken agreement to never again discuss a traumatic
event.
Although he didn’t realize it, Planck had removed a foundation
stone from the edi ce of classical physics; it would take another
twenty- ve years for the entire structure to collapse. However, the
immediate reaction was … nothing. For the next ve years neither
Planck nor any of the great physicists of the era took up the
meaning and extension of Planck’s ideas. Not the revered Hendrik
Lorentz in Holland, nor the profound but impenetrable Ludwig
Boltzmann in Vienna, nor any of Planck’s close colleagues picked up
the challenge. That was left to a twenty- ve-year-old patent
examiner and maverick theorist living in Bern, Switzerland. Like
Planck, thermodynamics and statistical mechanics had been his rst
love as a physicist. In addition he had been fascinated from an early
age by Maxwell’s equations and EM radiation. Unlike Planck
however, he had been rejected by academe and had no reputation to
lose. He was on the verge of taking the leap that Planck and the
other great physicists of the time had not even considered. He was
about to give Planck’s radiation law the most radical interpretation
possible: that it implied the discontinuity of motion on the atomic
scale. He would begin this uprising with a paper that he himself
termed “revolutionary.” His name was Albert Einstein.
1

Electromagnetic radiation is not the only way heat is transmitted over distances; quite
commonly a hot body (e.g., a heating coil in your stove) directly heats the air, which, as it
moves around (“convects”), comes in contact with other bodies and heats them up.
2

Moreover, the old terminology referring to the incorrect law, the “Planck-Wien law,” was
quickly adjusted to simply the “Wien law,” erasing from the physics canon the evidence of

Planck’s original error.
3

Surprisingly, the staid Planck had some things to say about extraterrestrials, as we will
see in chapter 14.

CHAPTER 2

THE IMPUDENT SWABIAN

We do not know the exact moment when Heinrich Weber
began to despise Albert Einstein. It de nitely was not at rst sight.
Professor Weber was the head of the Physics Department of the
Federal Institute of Technology, an up-and-coming engineering
school in Zurich, Switzerland, now known worldwide as ETH
Zurich. In 1895, when Weber and Einstein rst met, the “Poly” (as it
was called by the locals) had the immense advantage for the young
Einstein that it did not require a high school diploma for admission.
This was particularly pertinent for Einstein because he had rather
recently and without the consent of his parents “excused himself”
from the nal two years of his well-regarded German high school
(the Luitpold Gymnasium in Munich) on the basis of a nebulous
medical condition, “neurasthenic exhaustion.” In fact he had hated
the school, and once his parents had left Munich for Italy for
nancial reasons he saw no reason to stick it out. In late December
of 1894 the fteen-year-old Einstein showed up on their doorstep in
Milan and “assured them most resolutely” that he would self-school
himself in order to qualify for admission to the Zurich Poly by the
next fall.
Indeed Einstein was already an accomplished autodidact, having
taught himself di erential and integral calculus well ahead of the
school curriculum; to qualify for the Poly he had taken the
precaution of obtaining a letter of advanced mathematical
achievement from his teacher in Munich. Armed with this
certi cate, he presented himself to Albin Herzog, principal of the
Zurich Poly, in October of 1895, as a “prodigy” who should be
allowed to take the entrance exams a full year and a half before he

would attain the required minimum age. It was at this time that he
encountered Professor Weber, a reserved and digni ed scientist,
who, while not a physicist of historic stature, was a respected
experimental researcher in thermodynamics.
On the entrance exams Einstein con rmed the judgment of his
mathematics teacher, performing brilliantly on the math and physics
portions of the test. However, he was neither fond of nor talented in
subjects requiring a great deal of memorization, so he failed the
general sections of the exam, which covered subjects such as
literature, French, and politics. He thus failed to gain admission to
the Poly. Yet his strong showing in math and physics so impressed
Weber that he invited Einstein, against regulations, to attend his
own lectures for second-year physics students. But there was still the
minor matter of qualifying for admission, which could not be met by
auditing lectures in the subjects where Einstein already excelled. So,
at the suggestion of Herzog, Einstein enrolled in the cantonal high
school in nearby Aarau for an additional year of formal schooling.
He thrived there, nishing rst in the nal exams and gaining
automatic admission to the Poly in October of 1896.
It was then that his intense relationship with Weber began.
Weber was the primary physics instructor, and Einstein took fteen
courses from him, ten in the classroom and ve in the lab. He did
well in all of them. His very rst physics course was with Weber,
who immediately impressed him. “Weber lectured on heat … with
great mastery. I am looking forward from one of his lectures to the
next,” Einstein wrote in 1898 to his fellow student and future wife,
Mileva Maric. Einstein had been fascinated with physics since he
was a young boy, beginning with his experience of “wonder” at a
compass that he received at age ve, which revealed to him the
existence of unseen forces. Initially at the Poly his youthful love of
physics was nurtured, and he responded with a strong academic
performance: at the end of his rst two years he passed the
intermediate diploma exam with an overall grade of 5.7 out of 6,
placing him rst in his class.

But a problem was emerging. Einstein was aware of the great
advances in physical theory that had taken place in the previous
twenty
years,
and
speci cally
of
the
world-changing
electromagnetic theory of Maxwell and the bold statistical theory of
gases due to Boltzmann. In vain he awaited the appearance of these
exciting ideas in his classroom. Weber was a conservative scientist
and had no intention of teaching these recent and highly
mathematical developments in his lectures. A fellow student
remarked: “[Weber’s] lectures were outstanding but … [modern
developments] were simply ignored. At the conclusion of one’s
studies one was acquainted with the history of physics, but not with
its present or future.” In particular, “Einstein’s hopes of learning
something decisive about Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory were
not realized.” When, in his very last semester, Einstein heard a
lecture from the mathematician Hermann Minkowski on modern
formulations of Newton’s laws he remarked to a classmate, “this is
the rst lecture on mathematical [theoretical] physics we have
heard at the Poly.” This refusal to admit the existence of newer
ideas in physics apparently revived in Einstein a long-standing
characteristic of his personality, his disrespect for authority in the
classroom.
In later life Einstein spoke many times about how regimented his
early education had been, and how he had particularly disliked the
German system, as exempli ed by the Luitpold Gymnasium, which
he had ed in 1894. But contemporaries of his, even those with the
same Jewish background, did not recall this school as being
oppressive. In fact there seems to have been something in Einstein’s
own manner that contributed to the con icts he recalled; he had a
knack for driving his teachers to distraction. At the gymnasium his
frustrated Latin teacher, Joseph Degenhart, o ered one of history’s
great erroneous predictions: that “[Einstein] would never get
anywhere in life.” When Einstein maintained that he had committed
no o ense to elicit such an opinion, Degenhart replied, “your mere
presence here undermines the class’s respect for me.” After leaving
the gymnasium and ending up at Aarau, despite his much greater

a nity for this school, his tendency to be less than respectful to his
teachers did not change. While on a eld trip he was questioned by
his geology teacher, Mühlberg, as to whether the strata they were
observing ran upward or down; he replied, “It is pretty much the
same to me which way they run, Professor.” An Aarau classmate
recalled the impression made by the young Einstein. “A cold wind of
skepticism was blowing [that suited] the impudent Swabian…. Sure
of himself, his grey felt hat pushed back from his thick black hair,
he strode energetically up and down in the rapid, I might almost say
crazy tempo of a restless spirit which carries a whole world in itself.
Nothing escaped the sharp gaze of his large brown eyes. Whoever
approached him came immediately under the spell of his superior
personality. A sarcastic curl of his lip did not encourage Philistines
to fraternize with him…. his witty mockery pitilessly lashed any
conceit or pose.”
At Zurich, by his third year of study, the impudent Swabian had
reemerged, much to the dissatisfaction of Professor Weber. Einstein
began skipping classes and studying the modern works
independently, and with “holy zeal,” in his room or in cafés with
friends. Weber noticed that, unlike the other students, Einstein
always addressed him as “Herr Weber” and not as “Herr Professor,”
a brash gesture in the hierarchical Germanic universities of the time.
While Einstein continued to do well in Weber’s classes, his
arrogance surfaced most clearly in the experimental laboratory class
of Weber’s colleague Jean Pernet. At the beginning of each
laboratory class the students would be given a sheet of instructions,
or “chit,” on how to perform the required work. Einstein would
ostentatiously ing the sheet into the wastebasket and proceed by
his own methods. This infuriated Pernet, and not necessarily
without good reason, as Einstein’s explorations eventually caused an
explosion in the lab resulting in an injury to his right hand requiring
stitches, which appears to have upset him only because it prevented
him from playing the violin for several weeks. Pernet seems to have
sincerely misjudged Einstein’s ability, telling him “there is no lack of
eagerness or goodwill in your work, but a lack of capability.” When

Einstein protested that he felt he did have a talent for physics,
Pernet answered curtly, “I only wanted to warn you in your own
interests.” Eventually Pernet did more than warn Einstein; he
unked him in the course and had him placed on academic
probation.
Professor Weber of course was aware of all this and must also
have sensed Einstein’s loss of respect for him because of his
backward-looking pedagogy. By Einstein’s third year Weber had
developed a particular dislike for the young man, and this boiled
over when he confronted Einstein with the following critique:
“You’re a very clever boy, Einstein, an extremely clever boy, but
you have one great fault: you’ll never let yourself be told anything.”
Of course Weber was right on target, except for his choice of the
word “fault.”

FIGURE 2.1. Albert Einstein, “the impudent Swabian,” age 17, at his graduation from the
cantonal school in Aarau, Switzerland. ETH-Bibliothek Zurich, Image Archive.

By the end of his nal year, in the spring of 1900, it was clear
that Einstein had made an enemy of his former mentor. Previous to

his nal exams Einstein had to produce for Weber a diploma thesis.
Weber had rejected an earlier proposal by Einstein for a study of the
electron theory of electrical current and heat ow, and Einstein had
resigned himself to discussing a more mundane topic in heat
conduction, in which he had little interest. Three days before his
nal exams, when Einstein must have been quite pressured to
prepare for them, Weber made him recopy the entire diploma thesis
because he had not submitted it on the “regulation paper.” To top it
o , Weber then gave the thesis the poor grade of 4.5 out of 6.
Einstein’s falling out with Weber might not have had such major
consequences for his immediate future if not for another imprudent
decision he made. While the physics faculty of the Poly did not
contain scholars of historic distinction, the mathematics faculty did:
speci cally the number and function theorist Adolf Hurwitz and the
geometric number theorist Minkowski, whose lecture on
mathematical physics Einstein had admired. Minkowski was later to
reformulate Einstein’s special theory of relativity as a description of
four-dimensional space-time, becoming famous beyond science for
his dramatic statement that “henceforth space by itself and time by
itself are doomed to fade into mere shadows and only a kind of
union of the two will preserve an independent existence.” Einstein,
with his rm commitment to theoretical work and his obvious talent
for mathematics, could have impressed these important men with
his promise, had he deigned to attend their advanced classes. But he
decided that he knew all the math he needed for the physics he
intended to do and focused on his independent study of
contemporary physics. That the strongest student in his year (at the
halfway point of the program) decided to skip the most challenging
math courses did not go unnoticed. Years later Minkowski told the
physicist (and future close friend of Einstein) Max Born that
Einstein’s success had come as a “tremendous surprise, for in his
student days Einstein had been a lazy dog. He never bothered about
mathematics at all.” Thus by his graduation in June of 1900 Einstein
had alienated all the professors whom he might reasonably have
asked for the thing he really needed, a position as an academic

assistant. This was the standard means for a young graduate to
prepare for a career in research and teaching, and since it was very
poorly paid, it was rather routine to obtain, particularly for a
student of promise such as Einstein.
However it didn’t work out that way for young Albert. First,
cramming in all the material he had missed using the notes of his
friend and classmate Marcel Grossmann did not compensate for the
many lectures he had skipped. He produced a mediocre performance
on the nal exams, and, handicapped by the poor diploma grade he
had already received from Weber, he posted the lowest combined
grade point average of the four physics students who passed. (The
fth student taking the exams was Einstein’s future wife and current
amour, Mileva Maric; she did even worse and was not granted the
degree.) The other three passing students (Grossman, Kollros, and
Ehrat) were immediately granted posts as assistants to members of
the math faculty. Professor Weber, who needed two assistants for the
physics program, as his nal insult, engaged two engineering
graduates in preference to Einstein.

CHAPTER 3

THE GYPSY LIFE

“This Einstein will one day be a very great man.”
Although Einstein had nished college having made a poor
impression on his professors, the opposite was true of his peers.
Einstein already was a man of great charisma and charm, to go
along with his penetrating intellect and deep understanding of
science. The prediction of greatness came from Einstein’s classmate
Marcel Grossmann, only a few days after their rst meeting in 1898.
Grossmann, according to Einstein, “was a model student, close to his
teachers”; he would graduate at the top of their class and within a
few years become a mathematics professor himself at the Poly. He
and Einstein formed a genuine friendship: “Once every week,”
Einstein recalled, “I would solemnly go with him to the Café
Metropol on the Limmat Embankment and talk to him not only
about our studies, but also about anything that might interest young
people whose eyes were open.” Besides providing Einstein with the
invaluable class notes, Grossmann frequently had him as a visitor to
his home. Grossmann came from an old and well-connected family
near Zurich and would eventually save Einstein from his “vagabond
existence” after graduation by arranging for him (through his
father’s connections) a job at the patent o ce in Bern.
But it was not only the important Grossmann family whom
Einstein charmed; his sympathies were completely independent of
class or status. The woman who ran his boardinghouse, Stephanie
Markwalder, forgave him his repeated losing of the house key, as
“his impulsive and upright nature … was so irresistible.” To the
delight of Frau Markwalder and her daughter Suzanne, he lled
their house with joyful and passionate music-making, as well as

vigorous discussions, puns, and witticisms. Suzanne, who often
accompanied Albert’s violin playing on the piano, found his joie de
vivre infectious, as for example when she encountered Albert and
Mileva descending the Uetliberg mountain near Zurich and he called
out to her, “you must go all the way to the top. It’s marvelous up
there … it’s covered with tiny feathers (hoar frost).”
His generosity extended in all directions. Once, when he showed
up late to his regular meeting with Grossmann and comrades in the
Café Metropol, he explained that the laundry woman at the
boardinghouse had told him his violin playing made her work more
agreeable, so he had stayed on to please her. On another occasion
he came to the rescue of a biology student struggling to please the
demanding professor in her physics lab course. After witnessing the
student being dressed down by the professor, he o ered to take her
lab notebook home with him and returned it to her with results that
found commendation from the di cult man. However, when she
told him he was lucky to work for Weber instead, he couldn’t agree:
“What the one teaches is not right, but what the other teaches is not
right either!” Another physics classmate, Jakob Ehrat, often sat with
Einstein in class, and they became close. Ehrat was an anxious type,
not nearly as facile with the material as Einstein; Einstein would
help him maintain his composure before the nal exams (in which
he ended up doing better than Einstein). Einstein often visited him
and his mother at their home in Zurich, and on one memorable visit
the young Einstein showed up wearing the runner from his chest of
drawers as an improvised scarf. Ehrat was amused by his
eccentricity but did not fail to see the true character of the man. “I
never saw a trace of pettiness, the slightest weakening in his
courage for truth and in his refusal to compromise. His almost
prophetic gift for justice, his inner strength and spontaneous feeling
for beauty impressed me so much that I often dreamed of him long
after life had separated us.”
Not surprisingly Einstein’s personal magnetism, artistic
temperament, and striking appearance engendered romantic feelings
as well as admiration in the opposite sex. A male student whom he

taught after graduation wrote down the following somewhat
analytical description, which nonetheless makes the point: “Einstein
is 5 ft 9, broad shoulders and a slight stoop. Unusually broad short
skull. Complexion a matte light brown. A garish moustache sprouts
above his large sensual mouth. Nose rather aquiline, and soft deep
brown eyes. The voice is compelling, vibrant like the tone of a
cello.” A friend of his second wife described his looks more
succinctly: “He had the kind of male beauty that, especially at the
beginning of the century, caused such havoc.” Before coming to
Zurich Einstein had already captured the heart of Marie Winteler,
the sweet and naive daughter of his host family in Aarau. He broke
o this dalliance soon after arriving at the Poly. It was not long
before he had a new object of his interest, his fellow physics student
and classmate Mileva Maric.

FIGURE 3.1. Einstein, aged 19, as a student at the Poly, roughly at the time when he was
becoming involved with his rst wife, Mileva Maric. ETH-Bibliothek Zurich, Image
Archive.

Maric was three years older than Einstein and was, not
surprisingly, the only woman in the physics track at the Poly. It was
only through the great e orts of her father, Milos Maric, a Serbian
peasant who had married into the middle class, that she had
managed to obtain a math and physics education, from which
women were normally excluded. Having excelled at the Zagreb
Classical Gymnasium, she had enrolled in Zurich, with every
intention of pursuing a career in science. As the class was so small,
she met Einstein immediately in the fall of 1896, and there seems to
have been some instant chemistry between them, as there is
evidence that her decision to leave Zurich for Heidelberg a year
later was based on a need to get some distance from him and her
emerging feelings for him. However she was far from the meek,
simple sweetheart that Einstein had encountered in Marie Winteler;
here is how she answered his rst letter to Heidelberg:
It’s now been quite a while since I received your letter, and I
would have replied immediately … but you said I should write
to you someday when I happened to be bored. And I am very
obedient and I waited and waited for boredom to set in; but so
far my waiting has been in vain and I really don’t know how to
manage this; I could wait from here to eternity, but then you
would be right to take me for a barbarian, and, again, if I write
my conscience is not clear.
These are the words of a spirited, independent woman who
could almost match Einstein’s sarcastic wit and also his love of
science. Physically she was not considered a great catch; a friend
described her thus: “very smart and serious, small, delicate,
brunette, ugly.” She walked with a limp from a congenital hip defect
and had endured tuberculosis growing up; she su ered from bouts
of depression, something to which Einstein seemed immune even
during these trying early years (“I am a cheerful fellow … and have
no talent whatsoever for melancholic moods,” he wrote in 1901, in
the midst of his struggles with family and joblessness). All this
meant nothing to Einstein at the time: he had found a soul mate, an

outsider and rebel like him, who would join him on his journey of
intellectual discovery. Maric returned to the Poly in February of
1898, and their relationship blossomed; a growing intimacy
intertwined with a shared sense of discovery as Einstein began to
con de in her his ideas that implied that important physical theories
were wrong and had to be changed.
As early as March of 1899 Einstein wrote to Maric and told of
showing her photograph to his mother and of the tense interchange
that ensued (his mother’s deep antipathy to Maric would plague the
couple for many years). However, he ends the letter with an
intriguing hint: “My broodings about radiation are starting to get on
a somewhat rmer ground & I am curious whether something will
come out of them.” By the summer of that year he had begun
addressing her with the a ectionate nickname “Dolly” (Doxerl). In
one letter, after explaining to her, complete with equations, why he
believes the present electrodynamic theory cannot be correct, he
ends with: “If only you would be again with me a little! We both
understand each other’s black souls so well & also drinking co ee &
eating sausages, etc.” (Among Einstein’s inventions at that time was
the suggestive form of etcetera.) The summer of 1900 brought twin
disappointments: Einstein’s lack of success in landing an assistant’s
position, and Maric’s failure to pass the nal exams and receive her
degree. If anything this seemed to bring them closer together, and in
July Einstein, during a visit home, announced his intention to marry
Mileva, eliciting a “scene” of anger and disapproval from his
mother.
Einstein was unmoved by this display, but as often happened, he
found solace in reading physics papers, in this case the works of
Gustav Kircho , the rst physicist to understand the importance of
the thermal radiation law. Both of Einstein’s parents continued the
barrage of disapproval of Maric over the summer, but Einstein held
rm: “Mama and Papa are very phlegmatic people and have less
stubbornness in their whole body than I have in my little nger.” By
the fall of 1900 it was clear that for the immediate future it would
be Albert and Mileva against the world, both the world of bourgeois

society and the world of the physics establishment. In October
Einstein wrote his ancée from Milan: “You too don’t like the
philistine life any longer, do you! He who tasted freedom cannot
stand the chains any longer. How lucky I am to have found in you a
creature who is my equal, who is as strong and independent as I am
myself!”
It was not immediately obvious to Einstein how serious his plight
was as he cheerily expected something to turn up any day. He even
had the temerity to turn down an insurance job that his friend Ehrat
had lined up for him, saying “One must shun such stultifying
a airs.” Initially he clung to the naive hope that he could land a job
with the mathematician Hurwitz, whose courses he had avoided
rather brazenly. When this didn’t work out, he wrote to a friend:
“Neither of us have gotten a job and we support ourselves by private
lessons, when we can pick up some, which is still very questionable.
Is this not a journeyman’s or even a gypsy’s life? But I believe we
will be happy in it nonetheless.”

CHAPTER 4

TWO PILLARS OF WISDOM

The man loved mysterious Nature as a lover loves his distant
beloved. In his day there did not exist the dull specialization that
stares with self-conceit through horn-rimmed glasses and destroys
poetry.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN, ON MICHAEL FARADAY
“About Max Planck’s studies on radiation, misgivings of a
fundamental nature have arisen in my mind, so that I am reading
his article with mixed feelings.” So Einstein wrote to his Dolly from
Milan in April of 1901, a scant four months after Planck’s “act of
desperation” in Berlin had saved his own reputation but failed to
alert the physics community to the storm ahead. In the same letter
Einstein ruefully admits, “soon I will have honored all physicists
from the North Sea to the southern tip of Italy with my [job
inquiry].” Emboldened by his rst published article, which had
appeared in the prestigious journal Annalen Der Physik, Einstein had
sent a slew of postcards requesting an assistant’s position to the
well-known physicists and chemists of Europe. None of these
missives bore fruit, and as far as we know few of them were even
graced with a reply. Although Einstein was convinced that Weber
was behind the rejections, Einstein’s indi erent nal academic
record and his failure to receive the pro forma job o er from the
Poly would likely have been enough.
Despite these disappointments he was scraping together a living
through part-time jobs and private lessons and forging ahead with
his independent thinking about the current state of theoretical

physics. For much of this time he would be separated from his
ancée, but writing to her frequently. In his very next letter to
Maric he continues discussing Planck: “Maybe his newest theory is
more general. I intend to have a go at it.” A little later in the letter
he comments, “I have also somewhat changed my idea about the
nature of the latent heat in solids, because my views on the nature
of radiation have again sunk back into the sea of haziness. Perhaps
the future will bring something more sensible.” His last words were
prescient; his views on radiation would emerge from haziness to
enlarge the Planck radiation theory in a revolutionary manner,
while the latent (or speci c) heat of solids, a seemingly mundane
topic, would provide Planck’s theory with the radical physical
interpretation that it currently lacked. But before this could occur,
Einstein needed to plumb deeply into thermodynamics, Planck’s
specialty, and the newer atomistic discipline of statistical
mechanics, which attempted to explain and extend the laws of
thermodynamics. His main scienti c motivation at the time was not
to unravel the puzzles of relative motion. Einstein’s famous insight,
that resolving these puzzles would require a major reshaping of our
conceptions of time and space, would not occur to him for four
more years. Rather, his primary scienti c focus from his student
days was “to nd facts which would attest to the existence of atoms
of a de nite size.” Proving the existence of atoms and understanding
the physical laws governing their behavior was the original quest of
the Valiant Swabian.
The atomic world was the frontier of physics at the beginning of
the twentieth century. The disciplines of what is now called classical
physics had all developed without a need to delve too deeply into
the question of the nature of the microscopic constituents of matter.
That situation had now changed. If physics was going to progress, it
would be essential to understand the fundamental origin of
electromagnetic phenomena, of heat ow, of the properties of solids
(e.g., electrical conductivity, thermal conduction and insulation,
transparency, hardness), and the physical laws leading to chemical
reactions. The answers to these questions would only be found by

understanding the makeup of the atom and the physical interactions
between atoms and molecules.
Modern physics had begun with the work of Sir Isaac Newton in
the second half of the seventeenth century. He introduced a new
paradigm for the motion of objects (masses) in space: rst by the
bold assertion that the natural state of motion of a solid body is to
move at a constant speed in a straight line (Newton’s First Law), and
then by the statement that the state of motion changes in a
predictable manner when “forces” are acting on the body (Newton’s
Second Law). If one knew the force and mass of the body, the
Second Law would determine the instantaneous acceleration of the
mass, a, via the relation F/m = a. What it meant to speak of the
instantaneous rate of change of any quantity wasn’t (and isn’t)
obvious, but Newton cleared this up by means of a mathematical
innovation, the invention of calculus. From this point forward,
mechanics came to mean the study of the motion of masses under
the in uence of forces described by elaborations of Newton’s Second
Law, which could now be written as a “di erential equation” using
calculus.
For this law to be useful, scientists would need to have a
mathematical representation of the forces in nature, the F on the
left-hand side of F = ma. The forces of nature cannot be deduced;
they can only be hypothesized (okay, guessed) and tested for
whether their consequences make sense and agree with
experimental measurements. No amount of mathematical
legerdemain can get around that. Newton’s Second Law was an
empty tautology unless one had an independent mathematical
expression for the forces that mattered in a given situation.
Newton gained eternal fame by divining the big one, the one we
all know from infancy: the force of gravity. His universal law of
gravitation stated that two masses are attracted to each other along
the line between their centers, and the strength of that attraction is
proportional to the product of their masses and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance between them. Of course
this attraction is very weak between normal-size masses like two

people, but between the earth and a person or the earth and the sun
it is a big deal. From this law of gravitation and his Second Law,
Newton was able to calculate all kinds of solid-body motion: the
orbits of the planets in the solar system, the relation between the
moon and tides, the trajectories of cannonballs. Thus Newton had
published the rst major section of the “book of Nature,” which
was, Galileo famously declared, “written in the language of
mathematics.”
Along with the stunning mathematical insights of Newton and
their vast practical applications came an ontology, a view of what
the fundamental categories of nature were, and how events in the
world were related. As Einstein put it in his autobiographical notes,
“In the beginning—if such a thing existed—God created Newton’s
laws of motion together with the necessary masses and forces. That
is all. Anything further is the result of suitable mathematical
methods through deduction. What the nineteenth century achieved
on this basis … must arouse the admiration of any receptive man …
we must not therefore be surprised that … all the physicists of the
last century saw in classical mechanics a rm and empirical basis
for all … of natural science.”
At the core of the Newtonian view of nature was the concept of
rigid determinism, majestically expressed by the Marquis de
Laplace:
We may regard the present state of the universe as the e ect of
its past and the cause of its future. An intellect which at any
given moment knew all of the forces that animate nature and the
mutual positions of the beings that compose it, if this intellect
were vast enough to submit these data to analysis, could
condense into a single formula the movements of the greatest
bodies of the universe and that of the lightest atom; for such an
intellect nothing could be uncertain and the future just like the
past would be present before its eyes.
This Marquis Pierre Simon de Laplace was one of the great
masters of classical mechanics in the nineteenth century and became

known as the “French Newton.” He was willing to literally put his
neck on the line for his natural philosophy. When he presented his
ve-volume study of celestial mechanics to Napoleon, he was
greeted with the intimidating question: “Monsieur Laplace, they tell
me you have written this large book on the system of the universe
and have never even mentioned its Creator.” Laplace, normally
quite politic in his dealings with in uential men, in this case drew
himself up and replied bluntly, “I have no need of that hypothesis.”
While the relation between mass and the force of gravity was the
only fundamental law discovered by Newton, he and other
physicists knew that there must be other forces with associated
laws, for example, the pressure exerted by a gas (pressure is force
per unit area), which surely must have a microscopic origin. Near
the end of the eighteenth century Charles Augustin de Coulomb,
using a sensitive instrument known as the torsion balance,
de nitively measured another type of force, also of invisible origin:
the electrical force. Coulomb and others determined that, in
addition to mass, there is another important property of matter,
electrical charge, and that two charged bodies exert forces on each
other in a manner similar to the way gravity works in Newton’s
Second Law, that is, proportional to the product of their charges and
inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
However, there is a major di erence between this electrostatic force
and gravity; charges come in two types, positive and negative.
Opposite charges attract each other, but like charges repel. Matter is
usually electrically neutral (that is, made up of an equal number of
positive and negative charges) or very nearly neutral, so two chunks
of matter don’t usually exert much long-range electrical force on
each another. Therefore, despite the fact that the electrical force is
much stronger than the gravitational force (when appropriately
compared), it doesn’t have the same kind of macroscopic e ects as
gravity.
Early in the nineteenth century it became clear that the story
was even more complicated. Moving charges (i.e., electrical
currents) create yet another force, known to the ancients but not

understood as related to electricity: magnetism. Primarily through
the work of the English experimental physicist Michael Faraday, it
became clear that electricity and magnetism were intimately related
because, for example, magnetic elds could be used to create
electrical currents. Exploiting this principle, discovered in 1831 and
now known as Faraday’s law, Faraday was able to build the rst
electrical generator (he had earlier made the rst functioning
electric motor). Faraday’s discovery would lead to an expansion of
the classical ontology of physics, because it implied that electrical
charges and currents gave rise to unseen electric and magnetic elds,
which permeated space and were not associated with matter at all
but rather represented a potential to exert a force on charged matter.
These were the “unseen forces” that moved the compass needle,
which had fascinated Einstein as a child. Besides masses, forces, and
charges, there were now elds as well.
Faraday had risen from the status of a lowly bookbinder’s
apprentice to become Fullerian Professor of Chemistry at the Royal
Institution (during his life he rejected a knighthood and twice
declined the presidency of the Royal Society). When asked by the
four-time prime minister William Gladstone the value of electricity,
he is said to have quipped,1 “One day sir, you may tax it.” He had
little formal mathematical education and showed by experiment
that his ideas were correct but did not formulate them into a
rigorous theory.
That task was left to the Scottish physicist/mathematician James
Clerk Maxwell. Maxwell was a deeply religious man, related to
minor nobility, who showed an Einsteinian fascination with natural
phenomena from a young age. As early as age three he would
wander around the family estate asking how things worked, or as he
put it, “What’s the go o’ that?” He is widely regarded as the thirdgreatest physicist of all time, after Newton and Einstein, although he
is surely much less known to the public. He wrote his rst important
scienti c paper at the age of sixteen and attended Cambridge
University, where he excelled and became a Fellow shortly after
graduation. One of his contemporaries wrote of him, “He was the

one acknowledged genius … it was certain that he would be one of
that small but sacred band to whom it would be given to enlarge the
bounds of human knowledge.” At the age of twenty-three Maxwell
expressed his philosophy of science in terms that pre gure similar
sentiments of both Planck and Einstein:
Happy is the man who can recognize in the work of today a
connected portion of the work of life, and an embodiment of the
work of Eternity. The foundations of his con dence are
unchangeable, for he has been made a partaker of In nity. He
strenuously works out his daily enterprises, because the present
is given to him for a possession.
Maxwell had a full beard and a certain reserved presence that
was hard to warm up to (very unlike Einstein, the mensch);
however, he was a loyal friend and an almost saintly husband—in
all, a man of character and integrity. Despite his di dence, he
possessed a rapier-like wit, which he would only occasionally
display, as in the following. In his forties, having “retired” to his
Scottish country estate for health and personal reasons, he was
convinced to return to England to head the new Cavendish
Laboratory at Cambridge; he did a superb job and became an
important administrative gure in British science. In this capacity
he was asked to explain to Queen Victoria the importance of
creating a very high vacuum. He described the encounter thus:
I was sent for to London to be ready to explain to the Queen why
Otto von Guerike devoted himself to the discovery of nothing,
and to show her the two hemispheres in which he kept it … and
how after 200 years W. Crookes has come much nearer to
nothing and has sealed it up in a glass globe for public
inspection. Her majesty however let us o very easily and did
not make much ado about nothing, as she had much heavy work
cut out for her all the rest of the day.

The young Maxwell came to know the much older Faraday
personally as well as through his work and realized that his
experimental discoveries, which Faraday had framed qualitatively,
could be cast into a set of equations that describe all
electromagnetic phenomena in four compact formulas, now
universally known as Maxwell’s equations. Like Newton’s Second
Law these are four di erential equations, not describing masses and
forces but rather electrical elds, magnetic elds, electrical charges
and currents. If Maxwell had used only Faraday’s law and the
previously known laws of electrostatics and magnetism, he would
have found similar equations but with a disturbing asymmetry
between the role of the electric and magnetic elds. Maxwell
decided in 1861 that these two elds were di erent expressions of
the same uni ed force, and had the brilliant insight to add a new
term to one of the equations describing the magnetic eld, which
had the e ect of making the full set of equations perfectly
symmetric in regions of space where there were no electrical
charges or currents (as in vacuum). Thus he essentially added a
major clause to the laws of electromagnetism. The new term gave
rise to new e ects, called “displacement currents,” which were
veri ed experimentally. They also made the equations structurally
perfect. Boltzmann, quoting Goethe, said of Maxwell’s equations,
“was it God that wrote those lines?”

FIGURE 4.1. James Clerk Maxwell at roughly the age at which he proposed the
fundamental laws of classical electromagnetism. Courtesy of the Master and Fellows of
Trinity College Cambridge.

Having added his new contribution to the electromagnetic laws,
Maxwell made a historic discovery: electric and magnetic elds
could propagate through the vacuum in the form of a wave that
carried energy and could exert both electric and magnetic forces. In
physics the term wave refers to a disturbance in a medium (e.g.,
water or air) that oscillates in time and typically is extended, at any
single instant, over a large region of space. In this case the strength
of the disturbance is measured by the strength of the electric eld,
so that if an electric charge sat at one point in space the electric
eld would push the charge alternately up and then down, like a
rubber ball bobbing on surface waves propagating through water.
Moreover, if you moved along with the wave, like a surfer, the eld
would always push you in one direction, just as the surfboard stays
at the leading edge of a water wave (for a while).

Maxwell showed that the distance between crests of the
electromagnetic waves could be made arbitrarily large or small; that
is, any wavelength was possible. Thus he discovered what we now
call the electromagnetic spectrum, extending, for example, from
radio waves having a wavelength of a meter, to thermal radiation
(as we saw earlier) at ten millionths of a meter, visible light at half a
millionth of a meter, and on to x-rays at ten billionths of a meter.
This was a spectacular nding; but the epiphany, the earthshaking
revelation, was the speed of the waves: all of them traveled at the
same speed, the speed of light! Suddenly disparate phenomena
involving man-made electrical devices, natural electric and
magnetic phenomena, color, and vision were uni ed into one
phenomenon, the propagation of electromagnetic waves at 186,000
miles per second.
The beauty and signi cance of this discovery has awed physicists
ever since. One of the greatest modern theoretical physicists,
Richard Feynman, wrote of this event: “From the long view of the
history of mankind … the most signi cant event of the nineteenth
century will be judged as Maxwell’s discovery of the laws of
electrodynamics. The American Civil War will pale into provincial
insigni cance in comparison with this important scienti c event of
the same decade.” Maxwell himself, with typical understatement,
wrote to a friend in 1865, “I have also a paper a oat, with an
electromagnetic theory of light, which, until I am convinced of the
contrary, I hold to be great guns.”
Maxwell would go on to make other major contributions to
physics, speci cally with his statistical theory of gases, which will
be of great relevance below, but he was not recognized as a
transcendent gure during his lifetime. He died of abdominal cancer
in 1879 at the age of forty-eight, still at the peak of his scienti c
powers. While in hindsight we view Maxwell as poorly rewarded in
his time for his genius and service to society (he was never
knighted, for example), Maxwell did not see it that way. On his
deathbed he told his doctor, “I have been thinking how very gently I
have always been dealt with. I have never had a violent shove in my

life. The only desire which I can have is, like David, to serve my
generation by the will of God and then fall asleep.”
Maxwell’s achievement particularly captivated Einstein.
Maxwell, Faraday, and Newton were the three physicists whose
picture he had on the wall in his study later in life. Of Maxwell he
wrote, “[the purely mechanical world picture was upset by] the
great revolution forever linked with the names of Faraday, Maxwell
and Hertz. The lion’s share of this revolution was Maxwell’s … since
Maxwell’s time physical reality has been thought of as represented
by continuous elds…. this change in the conception of reality is the
most profound and fruitful that physics has experienced since the
time of Newton.” Elsewhere he said, “Imagine his feelings when the
di erential equations he had formulated proved to him that
electromagnetic elds spread in the form of … waves and with the
speed of light”; and, “to few men in the world has such an
experience been vouchsafed.”
Maxwell had completed the second pillar of classical physics,
what we now call classical electrodynamics, to go along with the
rst pillar, classical mechanics. But neither his nor Newton’s
equations in themselves answered the fundamental question: what is
the universe made of? One knew that there were masses and charges
and forces and elds, but what were the building blocks of the
everyday world? The enormous challenge was to extend these
physical laws down to this conjectured “atomic” scale. Were there
new, microscale forces not detectable at everyday dimensions? Did
Newton’s and Maxwell’s laws still hold there? Were atoms little
billiard balls with mass and electrical charge obeying classical
mechanics and electrodynamics? Were there atoms at all, or were
they just “theoretical constructs,” as many physicists and chemists
maintained until the end of the nineteenth century?
At the time of Maxwell there was no way to probe the internal
structure of atoms or molecules directly. As Maxwell put it, “No one
has ever seen or handled a single molecule. Molecular science
therefore … cannot be subjected to direct experiment.” However
physicists, led by Maxwell and Boltzmann, were beginning to use

the atomic concept to explain in great depth the macroscopic
behavior of gases. In doing so they were inferring properties of
atoms and their interactions. This was the work that Einstein never
forgave Herr Weber, his erstwhile mentor, for ignoring. It is here
that Einstein rst put his shoulder to the wheel.
1

This wonderful incident may well be apocryphal, as there is no contemporaneous account
of it.

CHAPTER 5

THE PERFECT INSTRUMENTS
OF THE CREATOR
“The Boltzmann is magni cent,” Einstein wrote to Maric
in September of 1900. “I am rmly convinced that the principles of
his theory are right, … that in the case of gases we are really
dealing with discrete particles of de nite nite size which are
moving according to certain conditions … the hypothetical forces
between molecules are not an essential component of the theory, as
the whole energy is kinetic. This is a step forward in the dynamical
explanation of physical phenomena.” Einstein was reading
Boltzmann’s Lectures on the Theory of Gases. The Viennese physicist
Ludwig Boltzmann and Maxwell had developed a theory of gases in
the 1860s with much the same content, but with the di erence that
Boltzmann wrote long, di cult-to-decode treatises, while Maxwell’s
work was much more succinct. Maxwell commented on this drily:
“By the study of Boltzmann I have been unable to understand him.
He was unable to understand me on account of my shortness, and
his length was and is an equal stumbling block to me.” Einstein,
despite the enthusiasm he expressed to his ancée in 1900, was
later to warn students, “Boltzmann … is not easy reading. There are
very many great physicists who do not understand it.” It is likely
that Einstein had no access to Maxwell’s work on gases in 1900, and
as he did not read English until much later in life, he would not
have been able to bene t from it anyway (in contrast, Maxwell’s
electrodynamics was available to Einstein in German textbooks).
Maxwell beautifully described the scienti c advance he had
made in atomic theory in an address to the Royal Society in 1873

titled, simply, “Molecules.”
An atom is a body which cannot be cut in two. A molecule is the
smallest possible portion of a particular substance. The mind of
man has perplexed itself with many hard questions…. [Among
them] do atoms exist, or is matter in nitely divisible? …
According to Democritus and the atomic school, we must
answer in the negative. After a certain number of sub-divisions,
[a piece of matter] would be divided into a number of parts each
of which is incapable of further sub-division. We should thus, in
imagination, arrive at the atom, which, as its name literally
signi es, cannot be cut in two. This is the atomic doctrine of
Democritus, Epicurus, and Lucretius, and, I may add, of your
lecturer.
Maxwell goes on to describe how chemists had already learned that
the smallest amount of water is a molecule made up of two
“molecules” of hydrogen and one “molecule” of oxygen (here he has
decided, somewhat confusingly, to use molecule to refer to both
atoms and molecules). Then he arrives at his current research.
Our business this evening is to describe some researches in
molecular science, and in particular to place before you any
de nite information which has been obtained respecting the
molecules themselves. The old atomic theory, as described by
Lucretius and revived in modern times, asserts that the
molecules of all bodies are in motion, even when the body itself
appears to be at rest…. In liquids and gases, … the molecules are
not con ned within any de nite limits, but work their way
through the whole mass, even when that mass is not disturbed
by any visible motion…. Now the recent progress of molecular
science began with the study of the mechanical e ect of the
impact of these moving molecules when they strike against any
solid body. Of course these ying molecules must beat against
whatever is placed among them, and the constant succession of

these strokes is, according to our theory, the sole cause of what
is called the pressure of air and other gases.
This simple picture, that gas pressure arises from the collisions of
enormous numbers of molecules with the walls of the container,
along with simple ideas of classical mechanics, allows Maxwell to
derive Boyle’s law, that the pressure of the gas is proportional to its
density. It also allows him to understand the observation that the
ratio of volumes of any two gases depends only on the ratio of
temperatures of the gases. The relation of temperature to volume of
a gas is critical: in this view absolute temperature (what we now
call the kelvin scale) is related to molecular motion and is
proportional to the average of the square of the molecular velocity
in a gas. Since the energy of motion for any mass, called kinetic
energy, is just one-half its mass times the square of the velocity, this
also means that for a gas its energy is just proportional to
temperature. As Einstein had noted in his letter to Maric, in the
Maxwell-Boltzmann theory, the entire energy of a gas is the kinetic
energy of moving molecules. This principle of the MaxwellBoltzmann theory, that the energy of each molecule is proportional
to the temperature, applies even in the solid state, in which the
molecules vibrate back and forth around xed positions instead of
moving freely throughout the substance. This property of the theory
would perplex Einstein later, when he was trying to make sense of
Planck’s radiation law.
“The most important consequence which ows from [our
theory],” Maxwell continues, “is that a cubic centimetre of every gas
at standard temperature and pressure contains the same number of
molecules.” This fact about gases was conjectured by the Italian
scientist Amadeo Avogadro in 1811. In 1865 Josef Loschmidt, a
professor in Vienna and later a colleague of Boltzmann, had
estimated this actual number, which is very large: 2.6 × 1019, or
roughly ve billion squared. (This “Loschmidt number” is closely
related to Avogadro’s number, which is the number of molecules in
a mole of any gas—both Einstein and Planck were very interested in

accurately determining these numbers). With all this information
about gas properties, it was possible for Maxwell to determine the
average velocity of a molecule in air. He found it to be roughly one
thousand miles per hour. He described the implications most
picturesquely:
If all these molecules were ying in the same direction, they
would constitute a wind blowing at the rate of seventeen miles a
minute, and the only wind which approaches this velocity is that
which proceeds from the mouth of a cannon. How, then, are you
and I able to stand here? Only because the molecules happen to
be ying in di erent directions, so that those which strike
against our backs enable us to support the storm which is
beating against our faces. Indeed, if this molecular bombardment
were to cease, even for an instant, our veins would swell, our
breath would leave us, and we should, literally, expire…. If we
wish to form a mental representation of what is going on among
the molecules in calm air, we cannot do better than observe a
swarm of bees, when every individual bee is ying furiously,
rst in one direction, and then in another, while the swarm as a
whole … remains at rest.
Maxwell goes on to describe how his own experiments and
others have determined that the molecules in a gas are continually
colliding with one another, moving only about ten times their
diameter before changing direction again through a collision,
leading to a kind of random motion called di usion. Because of this
constant changing of direction, the actual distance moved from the
starting point during a given time is much less than if the molecule
were moving in a straight line. This explained why, when Maxwell
took the lid o a vial of ammonia in the lecture, its characteristic
odor was not immediately detected in the far reaches of the lecture
hall. The same kind of di usion occurs in liquids such as water, but
much more slowly. Maxwell then throws o a poetic but profound
comment: “Lucretius … tells us to look at a sunbeam shining
through a darkened room … and to observe the motes which chase

each other in all directions…. This motion of the visible motes … is
but a result of the far more complicated motion of the invisible
atoms which knock the motes about.” Exactly this process occurs to
small particles suspended in a liquid but visible under a microscope,
so-called Brownian motion. In one of his four masterpieces of 1905
Einstein would actually take the suggestion of Lucretius and
Maxwell seriously and, by careful analysis, turn this into a precise
method for determining Avogadro’s number! Experiments by the
French physicist Jean Perrin would con rm Einstein’s predictions
and determine that number very precisely; as a result Perrin
received the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1926, long after his work
had permanently put to rest doubts about the existence of atoms.
The kind of complex, essentially random motion characteristic of
gas molecules gave rise to a new way of doing physics, described by
Maxwell in the same lecture. “The modern atomists have therefore
adopted a method which I believe new in the department of
mathematical physics, though it has long been in use in the section
of statistics.” Thus was born the discipline of statistical mechanics.
Maxwell could only assume that the invisible molecules obeyed
Newtonian mechanics; he had no reason to doubt this. But in
describing what would happen in a gas, he realized that one must
inevitably encounter the weak point in Laplace’s grandiose dictum.
Laplace had imagined an intellect that “at a certain moment would
know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all
items of which nature is composed.” Maxwell realized that getting
all the necessary information and using it to predict the future was
an absurd proposition. “The equations of dynamics completely
express the laws of the historical [Laplacian] method as applied to
matter, but the application of these equations implies a perfect
knowledge of all the data … but the smallest portion of matter
which we can subject to experiment consists of millions of
molecules, not one of which becomes individually sensible to us …
so that we are obliged to abandon the historical method and to
adopt the statistical method of dealing with a large group of
molecules.” Maxwell’s point is that for all practical purposes one

doesn’t want to know what each molecule is doing anyway; for
example, to nd the pressure exerted by a gas one needs only to
know the average number of molecules hitting the wall of a
container per second, and how much momentum (mass times
velocity) they transfer to the wall.
This was the key insight of Maxwell and Boltzmann: to predict
the physical properties of a large aggregation of molecules, one
needed only to nd their average behavior, assuming they were
behaving as randomly as allowed by the laws of physics. Calculating
these properties was relatively easy for a gas, where most of the
time the molecules are not in close contact; for liquids and solids it
was much harder and in certain cases still challenges the physicists
of the twenty- rst century. Tied up with this insight was a new
understanding of the laws of thermodynamics. The First Law says
that heat is a form of energy, and that the total energy (heat plus
mechanical) always stays the same (is “conserved”) even when one
form is being changed into the other. For example, when a car is
moving at 60 miles per hour, it has a lot of mechanical energy,
speci cally kinetic energy, ½mv2, where m is the mass of the car
and v is its speed (60 mph in this case). When you slam on the
brakes, that kinetic energy doesn’t disappear; it is turned into heat
in your brakes and tires, due to friction. From the point of view of
statistical mechanics, that heat is just mechanical energy
transmitted to the molecules of the road and tires, distributed in
some complicated and apparently random manner among them. So
heat is just random, microscopic mechanical energy, stored in
various forms in the atoms and molecules of gases, liquids, and
solids.
This view sheds light on the Second Law, which states that
disorder always increases and is measured by a quantity called
entropy. This law now can be interpreted as saying that in any
process where something changes (e.g., the car coming to a stop),
you can never perfectly “reorganize” all the energy that goes into
the random motion of molecules. It is always too hard to retrieve all
of it in a useful form. Before the car stopped, all its molecules (in

addition to some random motion due to its non-zero temperature)
were moving together in the same direction at 60 mph, providing a
kinetic energy that could be used to do useful work, such as
dragging a heavy object against friction. As the car stops, that
energy is transformed into the less usable form of heat. It is not that
we can’t turn heat back into usable energy (e.g., use it to get the car
moving again); it is just that we can’t do it perfectly. We could run
some water over the hot brake discs of our stopped car, which could
generate steam, which could turn a turbine, and, presto, we would
get back some useful mechanical energy. This of course is not the
best-designed heat engine one could imagine. But the Second Law
says that no matter how carefully or cleverly you design an engine
to turn heat into useful mechanical energy, you will always nd that
you have to put more heat energy in than you get back.
To make this all precise and tractable in a mathematical theory,
the German physicist Rudolph Clausius, while a professor at our
familiar Zurich Poly in 1865, introduced the notion of entropy,
which is a measure of how much the microscopic disorder increases
in every process involving heat exchange. The word entropy was
chosen from the Greek word for “transformation,” and indeed
Clausius was guided by just the picture we have been painting: heat
is the internal energy of atoms or molecules, which can be partially
but never fully transformed to usable energy. Now, with their new
statistical mechanics, Maxwell and Boltzmann were trying to make
this idea of the internal energy of a trillion trillion rocking and
rolling molecules precise, and in so doing come to understand
entropy and the laws of thermodynamics on the basis of atomic
theory. This program was so controversial that even by the end of
the century, thirty years later, Planck, the thermodynamicist par
excellence, was reluctant to adopt it. It was only his quantum
conundrum that forced him to overcome his scruples, as we will see.
The key point is that the statistical mechanics of Maxwell and
Boltzmann was still Newtonian mechanics, just applied to a system so
complicated that one imagines it behaving like a massive game of
chance, in which each molecular collision with a wall or with

another molecule is like a coin being tossed (heads you go to the
right, tails you go to the left). The worldview is the same as that of
Newton and Laplace; only the method is di erent. Maxwell, had he
lived another two decades, might have begun to recognize the leaks
springing in this optimistic vessel, since the basic inconsistency in
this view appeared at the intersection of his two great inventions,
the theory of electromagnetic radiation and the statistical theory of
matter. However, that was not to be; he would pass away a mere
ve years after his spectacular lecture on molecular science, having
spent those nal years occupied by his administrative duties. At the
end of that same lecture, having anticipated the next twenty- ve
years of physical theory, the devout Maxwell makes one of the great
historical appeals for intelligent design:
Natural causes, as we know, are at work, which tend to modify,
if they do not at length destroy, all the arrangements and
dimensions of the earth and the whole solar system. But … the
molecules out of which these systems are built … remain
unbroken and unworn.
They continue this day as they were created, perfect in
number and measure and weight, and from the ine aceable
characters impressed on them we may learn that those
aspirations after accuracy in measurement, truth in statement,
and justice in action, which we reckon among our noblest
attributes as men, are ours because they are essential
constituents of the image of Him Who in the beginning created,
not only the heaven and the earth, but the materials of which
heaven and earth consist.
The next century would demonstrate in many ways, culminating
in the awesome demonstration of August 1945, that atoms are not
as indestructible as Maxwell had supposed. And Einstein would be
the rst to understand, through his most famous equation, E = mc2,
just how much energy would be released when the perfect
instruments of the Creator were disassembled.

CHAPTER 6

MORE HEAT THAN LIGHT

“I have again made the acquaintance of a sorry example
of that species—one of the leading physicists of Germany. To two
pertinent objections which I raised about one of his theories and
which demonstrate a direct defect in his conclusions, he responds by
pointing out that another (infallible) colleague of his shares his
opinion. I will shortly give that man a kick up the backside with a
hefty publication. Authority befuddled is the greatest enemy of
truth.”
Such was the feisty mood of Einstein as he wrote in July of 1901
to an old friend, Jost Winteler. The object of his ire was Paul Drude,
theorist and chief editor of Annalen der Physik, the most prestigious
physics journal in the world at that time. Drude himself was the
author of a well-respected text on optics and Maxwell’s equations
(in fact it was Drude who introduced the universal symbol c for the
speed of light in vacuum). The “infallible” colleague mentioned by
Einstein was none other than Ludwig Boltzmann. Einstein,
characteristically, seemed oblivious to the potential consequences of
o ending such prominent scientists, one of whom was editor of the
journal to which he would submit all his original research papers for
the next six years.
Einstein wrote those lines from the small city of Winterthur,
about twenty miles from Zurich, where he had a two-month position
teaching physics and mathematics at the Technical College while
the regular instructor was performing his military service. The
teaching load was quite heavy, thirty hours a week, but, undeterred,
he reassured Mileva that “the Valiant Swabian is not afraid.” In fact
he found that he enjoyed the teaching much more than he had

expected, and despite the busy schedule he managed time to study
research questions, such as Drude’s new “electron theory of metals.”
It was only four years earlier, in 1897, that the English physicist J.
J. Thomson had con rmed the existence of electrons, negatively
charged particles much lighter than the hydrogen atom itself, and
he hypothesized that electrons were constituents of atoms. By 1899
Thomson had shown that electrons could be pulled o atoms (a
process we now call “ionization”) and hence that the atom was in
this sense divisible. This represented the rst crack to appear in the
indestructible atoms of Maxwell.
Drude’s theory was based on a guess about the atomic properties
of metals. He hypothesized (correctly) that, in a metal such as
copper, one of the electrons in each atom was free to move. While
the atoms themselves remained xed in a solid regular crystalline
array, these free electrons formed a gas of charged particles that
could move easily through the solid, allowing it to conduct
electricity and heat e ciently. Drude’s hypothesis was that many of
the important properties of metals arose from this gas of electrons,
and he thus could use the kinetic theory of Maxwell and Boltzmann
to calculate those properties. This was an important step forward,
and some of Drude’s conclusions were based on such general
considerations that they remain true and are used in our modern
(quantum) theory of metals. Other conclusions he drew from his
theory relied on Newtonian mechanics and are now known to be
false. Einstein’s letter to Drude, pointing out his “errors,” and
Drude’s reply are lost, so nothing is known about the validity of
Einstein’s objections. What is known is that around this time
Einstein began his own reworking of the basic principles of
statistical mechanics.
Einstein’s very rst published work on atomic theory (the one he
sent along with his job inquiries) was based on a naive hypothesis
about molecular forces: that they behaved similarly to gravity in
that they depended only on the distance between molecules, and on
the type of molecules involved. He wrote about this work to his
former classmate Grossmann in April of 1901: “As for science, I

have a few splendid ideas…. I am now convinced that my theory of
atomic attraction forces can also be extended to gases…. That will
also bring the problem of the inner kinship between molecular
forces and Newtonian action-at-a-distance forces much nearer to its
solution.” Einstein’s simple attraction hypothesis was wrong, and
despite his initial enthusiasm he abandoned it after using it in two
articles for Annalen der Physik, which he later referred to as “my
worthless rst two papers.” These works did emphasize that at the
time there was no real understanding among physicists about the
origin of molecular forces. After the modern atomic theory was
established, it became clear that all the atomic forces important for
chemistry or solid-state physics ultimately arise from
electromagnetic forces; there are no special new molecular forces.1
However, how atoms behave under the in uence of these forces is
quite di erent from what was expected, because they obey a new
mechanics (quantum mechanics) and not the classical mechanics of
Newton. (In addition, there are new forces within the atomic
nucleus, hinted at by the phenomenon of radioactivity, which had
just been discovered, but these forces are generally not important
for chemistry or solid-state physics.) Einstein praised Boltzmann’s
statistical theory of gases precisely because it didn’t rely much on
the unknown molecular forces, and after his rst immature e orts
he decided to pursue the path of statistical mechanics into the
atomic realm.
At the end of 1901 Einstein received “A letter from Marcelius
[Marcel Grossmann] … a very kind letter” telling him that the
patent o ce position would soon be advertised and that he would
de nitely get it. “In two months time we would then nd ourselves
in splendid circumstances and our struggle would be over,” he wrote
to Maric, but, he hastened to add, their bohemian lifestyle would
not change “We shall remain students [horribile dictu] as long as we
live, and not give a damn about the world.” One more professional
disappointment remained. In November 1901 Einstein submitted a
PhD thesis on the kinetic theory of gases to Professor Alfred Kleiner
at the University of Zurich (the Poly was not yet able to grant PhD

degrees, although with Weber in charge it is not likely that Einstein
would have tried that route anyway). Only indirect information
survives about what transpired, but Einstein withdrew the thesis
early in 1902, apparently at Kleiner’s suggestion, “out of
consideration for [Kleiner’s] colleague Ludwig Boltzmann,” who,
despite Einstein’s admiration for his work, had been “sharply
criticized” on certain points.
By February of 1902 Einstein had relocated to Bern, a
picturesque Swiss city on the river Aare. His job at the patent o ce
would not start for ve months, and he remained without visible
means of support, so he literally hung out his shingle.
Private Lessons in
MATHEMATICS and PHYSICS
for students and pupils
given most thoroughly by
ALBERT EINSTEIN, holder of the fed.
polyt. teacher’s diploma
GERECHTIGKEITGASSE 32, 1st oor
Trial Lessons Free
“The situation with the private lessons isn’t bad at all. I have
already found two gentlemen, an engineer & an architect & more in
prospect,” Einstein wrote to Maric shortly after arrival. His letter
was apparently a bit too cheerful, as he soon received a reply from
his ancée, which is lost, but the content of which is clear from
Einstein’s rapid follow-up: “It is true … that it is very nice here. But
I would rather be with you in some backwater than without you in
Bern.” Actually, although Einstein painted a rosy picture of his life
in Bern, an old family friend who visited him there described his
condition as “testifying to great poverty … [living in] a small,
poorly furnished room.” Strikingly, Einstein never complains in his
letters about material conditions, making only occasional humorous
allusions to this “annoying business of starving.”

In Bern Einstein quickly gathered around him a lively circle of
friends with shared intellectual interests, several of whom would
become lifelong companions. By the end of June 1902 he had taken
up his post at the patent o ce as an expert third class (the lowest
rank), and his immediate nancial woes were ended. In October of
that year he obtained grudging permission from his parents (at his
father’s deathbed) to marry Mileva, and on January 6, 1903, with
no family present, only two friends, the couple were married with
complete lack of ceremony at the Bern registry o ce. Typically,
Einstein had trouble getting into their new apartment that night, as
he had forgotten the key. Mileva had gone through many
tribulations to get to this point, and it seems that after failing twice
to get her teacher’s degree from the Poly, she had now given up her
own scienti c ambitions. Einstein reports to his friend Michele
Besso that she takes good care of him and he “leads a very pleasant,
cozy life” with her; in the same letter he tells Besso that he has just
sent o his second paper on statistical mechanics, pronouncing the
paper “perfectly clear and simple, so that I am quite satis ed with
it.”
The main point of Einstein’s rst two papers on statistical
mechanics was to frame all the statistical relations that ultimately
underlie the First and Second Laws of thermodynamics in a very
general way, no longer referring speci cally to gases and collisions
in gases, as was done by Maxwell and Boltzmann. Thermodynamics
is supposed to apply to everything that stores energy and can absorb
or give o heat, which is essentially everything: liquids, solids,
machines, … you name it. The Second Law of thermodynamics
implies that no engine can change heat into useful work with
perfect e ciency. Stated more picturesquely, it is impossible to
make a perpetual-motion machine, a machine that, once it gets
started, will go forever in a repeated cycle without needing fuel.
Einstein, in his new job at the patent o ce, was regularly coming
across proposed “inventions” that, upon closer inspection, were
physically impossible because they violated this principle. The

generality of the laws of thermodynamics must have been very
much on his mind.
And so he wrote two papers that assume almost nothing about
the nature of molecular forces, or the macroscale nature (e.g., gas,
solid, etc.) of the thermodynamic system being considered, and that
lead to several equivalent forms of the Second Law. The papers
make only one assumption, an assumption so subtle that it had been
the cause of debate since the time of Maxwell. Einstein appears to
have been unaware of this raging debate and does not emphasize
this assumption (to be discussed later) or comment on it in any
detail. However, the mathematical results of these papers and the
formal framework he introduces are quite important, and would
alone have made his name known a century later, except for some
bad luck.
Independently, and earlier, Josiah Willard Gibbs at Yale
University had established exactly the same principles (“the
resemblance is downright startling,” Max Born later commented)
and applied them very powerfully to chemical problems. Gibbs, the
son of an eminent theologian and scion of an old New England
family, received in 1863 the rst PhD in engineering granted in the
United States. He brie y studied in Europe and became acquainted
with the nascent German school of thermodynamics, begun with
Clausius and continuing in Einstein’s day with Planck. Very
reminiscent of Maxwell in his breadth of interests, Gibbs would
make enormous contributions as a physicist, chemist, and
mathematician until his death in 1903; he is arguably the greatest
American-born scientist of all time. In fact Maxwell himself was so
impressed with a clever geometric method devised by Gibbs to
determine chemical stability that he made a plaster model
illustrating the idea with his own hands and sent it to Gibbs.
Gibbs introduced the concept of “free energy,” which dominates
modern statistical mechanics and is often denoted by the symbol G
in honor of Gibbs; this is just one of twelve important scienti c
contributions bearing his name to this day. His work was initially
slow in becoming known in Europe, but just as Einstein was

beginning his own statistical studies, Gibbs’s monumental treatise,
Elementary Principles of Statistical Mechanics, was published, and he
was awarded the Copley Medal of the Royal Society of London.
(Before the Nobel prizes, which were rst awarded in 1901, this was
the most prestigious international science award of the day.)
Gibbs’s contributions predated and overwhelmed those of
Einstein, and Einstein would later comment in print that had he
known of Gibbs’s work earlier, he would “not have published those
papers at all, but con ned myself to a the treatment of some few
points [that were distinct].” Einstein’s admiration for Gibbs
remained so great throughout his life that when, a year before his
death in 1955, he was asked who were the most powerful thinkers
he had known, he replied: “[Hendrik] Lorentz,2 I never met Willard
Gibbs; perhaps, had I done so, I might have placed him besides
Lorentz.” So already, before his twenty- fth birthday, Einstein had
established himself as a deep thinker, on par with the great leaders
of his era; unfortunately no scientist of any in uence seems to have
noticed this at the time. Moreover he was not advancing his career
aspirations by telling the leading physicists in Germany of the errors
they had made in their earlier work. He would need to devise new
theories, which made speci c experimental predictions, to get the
world’s attention. These would not be long in coming, and when
they did come, the free-spirited bohemian outsider would soar
above even the great men—Maxwell, Gibbs, and Lorentz—whom he
so admired.
1

There are forces inside the atomic nucleus that were unknown at that time, now called,
unimaginatively, the “strong” and “weak” nuclear forces. At that time the existence of the
nucleus was itself unknown.
2

Hendrik Lorentz, a Dutch physicist, was widely regarded as the most eminent theorist of
the generation preceding Einstein’s; he will play an important role in our story below.

CHAPTER 7

DIFFICULT COUNTING

The tomb of Ludwig Boltzmann in Vienna is engraved
with a very short and simple-looking equation, which, ironically, he
never wrote down during his lifetime:
S = k log W.
S is the universal symbol for entropy, k is a fundamental constant of
nature known as Boltzmann’s constant, and log W is the logarithm1
of a number, W, relating to the physical system of interest, a
number that Boltzmann called the number of “complexions.” (The
number W can be so devilishly hard to calculate for many physical
systems of interest that the greatest mathematical physicists of the
twenty- rst century, and the most powerful computers as well, are
helpless to determine it.) This equation was the lever for setting the
quantum revolution in motion. It would form the basis for Planck’s
derivation of his radiation law and for Einstein’s rst insights into
the quantum nature of light.
Clausius had introduced the concept of entropy to explain heat
ow, but he had no idea how a physicist could calculate this
quantity from any fundamental mechanical theory (presumably an
atomic theory). It was the statistical mechanics of Boltzmann,
Maxwell, Gibbs (and Einstein) that gave the recipe. The recipe is
deceptively simple sounding. It has two parts: (1) Whatever can
happen, will happen. (2) No atom (or molecule) is special.

FIGURE 7.1. The epitaph on the tomb of Ludwig Boltzmann, S = k log W, expressing the
fundamental equation of entropy, which he had discovered. Image courtesy Daderot.

Imagine shooting gas molecules one by one through a small hole
into a box where they bounce around. Mentally divide the box into
two equal parts with an imaginary partition. Any part of the box is
equally accessible to the molecules (whatever can happen, will), and
there is no reason for any molecule to be at one place at a given
time versus another (no molecule is special). Suppose for the
moment you can actually see the molecules directly. With one
molecule in the box you look in periodically, and you nd it roughly
half the time on the left side of the box and half the time on the
right side. Now add a second molecule, wait a bit, and start looking
again. Roughly one-fourth of the time both molecules are on the

left, one-fourth of the time both are on the right, and half the time
one is on the left and one is on the right. Why is the last case more
likely than the rst two? Because there are two ways that you can
get the last case (molecule 1 on right, molecule 2 on left; molecule 2
on right, molecule 1 on left) but only one way you can get the rst
two cases. This is just like tossing two coins and nding that one
heads and one tails happens roughly twice as often as heads-heads
and tails-tails. We can now get fancy and de ne three “states” for
the two-molecule gas: in state one, both are on the left; state two,
both on the right; and state three, one on the left and one on the
right. For the rst two states Boltzmann’s W = 1 (there is only one
way to get these states), but for the third state2 W = 2. The entropy
of this third state is then larger than that of the other two states,
according to Boltzmann’s formula (we need not delve into the
mysterious properties of the logarithm function to reach this
conclusion). In actuality a physicist would specify the states in more
detail than just which half of the box the molecules are in, but the
underlying concept and method is exactly the same.
Now imagine we have a few trillion trillion molecules in the box
(as indeed we usually do). There is still only one way to have all of
them on one side; however, W, the number of ways of having about
half on the right side and half on the left side, is unspeakably large.
We literally have no words, no analogies, for numbers of this
magnitude. As a feeble attempt, imagine the following: take all the
atoms in the universe and, in one second, clone each of them, so as
to create a second “universe.” Now repeat this every second,
creating 4, 8, 16, and so on “universes.” Do this every second for the
entire age of our current universe. Add up all of the atoms in all
these universes and you will arrive at a number that is incredibly
big, all right, but still this number is negligibly small compared with
the number of states of high entropy of one liter of gas. These high
entropy states, in which the gas molecules are roughly equally
distributed in each half, have (not surprisingly) enormously higher
entropy than the states in which the molecules are all or mostly on
one side of the box.

Suppose that we go to a lot of trouble and evacuate the gas from
the box, put an airtight partition in the middle, and put the gas back
in on the left side, so that we set the system up in this very
improbable (low entropy) state. From Maxwell we know that the gas
molecules are ying around at 1,000 mph, colliding with one
another and the walls and thus creating pressure on the walls. If we
then remove the partition, the gas will rapidly ll the entire box
again, approximately equally in each half. The entropy of the system
will have increased. After the molecules spread themselves out
roughly equally in the box, the molecules will still be colliding and
moving around, but on average there will be roughly equal numbers
on each side of the box. Intuitively this situation is the most
disordered state (you don’t need to make special e orts to achieve
it), and according to Boltzmann’s principle, this is the state of
maximum entropy. This is the atomic explanation for the Second
Law of thermodynamics, that entropy always increases or stays the
same. Whenever we try to generate useful work from heat, we are
essentially trying to create order out of this molecular chaos, and we
are ghting against the laws of probability.
Consider further the previous example, where we have opened a
partition and let the gas ll the entire box instead of just half the
box. Now it is possible that if we wait long enough, all the collisions
could work out just right, and all the gas molecules could reconvene
on the left side. Is it worth waiting for this to occur? Not really. One
can easily calculate that if all the states are equally likely and if we
have only forty gas molecules in the box, it would take about the
age of the universe for this to happen. With a trillion trillion
molecules in the box? As they say in New York: fuggedaboutit.
This was the subtle point that Einstein missed in trying to prove
that the Second Law of thermodynamics, the increase of entropy, is
an absolute law. It isn’t absolute; entropy is allowed to decrease. Just
don’t bet on it.
In fact, this overwhelmingly probable increase of entropy is how
we determine the direction of time. Imagine that the gas in our box
is colored and hence visible as it expands; if we saw a movie of the

gas contracting back into half of the box, we would immediately
assume that the movie was being run backward. Because the arrow
of time is so fundamental, it was natural for physicists to assume
that the increase of entropy was an absolute law of nature and not
just a very, very, very, very, very … likely occurrence. When the
young Einstein made this mistake, he was in good company;
Boltzmann also got this wrong until his critics pointed it out to him.
However, the canny Scot, Maxwell, was not fooled, and described
the situation with colorful imagery: “the Second Law of
Thermodynamics has the same degree of truth as the statement that
if you throw a tumblerful of water into the sea, you cannot get the
same tumblerful of water out again.”
Maxwell invented an imaginary creature, dubbed “Maxwell’s
demon,” to illustrate this point further. His demons were “lively
beings incapable of doing work” (i.e., of adding energy to the gas).
He imagined these miniature sprites hovering in the gas, which is
uniformly distributed in the box, but now a partition is added to the
box, in which the demon has cleverly fashioned a frictionless
trapdoor. Whenever the demon sees a gas molecule coming at him
from the right to left with high velocity, he lets it through, then
closes the trapdoor before any molecules can escape from the left to
right. In this way over time he groups the faster molecules on the
left and the slower ones on the right. But for a gas the temperature
is proportional to the average energy, so by doing this the demon
has heated the left side and cooled the right side, without putting any
energy in. In other words the demon has created a refrigerator on the
right (and a heater on the left), neither of which require any fuel
(Einstein de nitely would have rejected this patent). And why did
Maxwell create his demons? Not as a serious proposal for an
invention. Instead his intention was “to show that the Second Law
of Thermodynamics has only a statistical certainty.” Maxwell’s
demons, spawned around 1870, did not fancy the trip across the
Channel, and so the true meaning of the Second Law was not
understood in Europe for several more decades.

While Einstein did not recognize the “demonic” exception to the
Second Law when he was reinventing Gibbs’s statistical mechanics
in 1903–4, he did very much focus on what he called “Boltzmann’s
principle,” the mathematical epitaph, S = k log W, mentioned
above. In his third paper on statistical mechanics in 1904, he states,
“I derive an expression for the entropy of a system, which is
completely analogous to the expression found by Boltzmann for
ideal gases [S = k log W] and assumed by Planck in his theory of
radiation” (italics added). Later in that same paper he explicitly
applies his results to Planck’s thermal radiation law, although in a
manner that doesn’t yet refer to the quantum concept. This made
Einstein the rst physicist to extend the use of Planck’s law and to
accept that statistical mechanics, which had previously been used
only to describe gases, could also explain the properties of
electromagnetic radiation. Radiation at this point was conceived to
be a purely wave phenomenon, having nothing in common with the
aggregate of particles (molecules) that make up a gas. Einstein now
analyzed thermal radiation using his statistical methods, and he was
beginning to see the problems with Planck’s “desperate” solution.
So what had Planck actually assumed about radiation, and how
had he used Boltzmann’s principle to justify the formula that he had
initially guessed by tting the data? Planck had not been as bold as
Einstein; he did not apply statistical mechanics to radiation but
rather to the matter that exchanged energy with radiation. The
Planck radiation law is, strictly speaking, only completely correct
for what physicists call a “blackbody.” We all learn in school that
the color white is a mixture of all colors and that black is the
absence of color. A perfectly black body absorbs all light that falls
upon it; hence no light of any color is directly re ected from it, and
it appears black. In contrast, a surface that looks blue to us absorbs
most of the red and yellow light incident on it and re ects the blue
to our eye. But does the black object actually emit no light? Well,
yes and no. It doesn’t emit any visible light, but it does send out a lot
of electromagnetic radiation; however, as we learned earlier, if the
object is at room temperature, the radiation is mainly at infrared

wavelengths, which we can’t see. As already mentioned, the
radiation law is precisely the rule for how much EM radiation of a
given wavelength a blackbody emits at a given temperature.
To test this ideal behavior, physicists had to nd a perfectly
black body, not just for visible radiation but for all possible
wavelengths. Unfortunately all real materials re ect EM radiation at
some wavelengths, so soot, oil, burnt toast, and the other obvious
candidates don’t actually do the job. So the experimenters came up
with a clever idea: instead of using the surface of a material, they
would use the inside of a kind of furnace with a small hole. Any
radiation that went in through the hole would bounce around, being
re ected many times, but eventually it would be absorbed before
escaping. Thus any light coming out of the hole must have been
emitted from the walls and would be representative of a perfect
blackbody.
It was this kind of ideal black box or “radiation cavity” that
Planck analyzed between 1895 and 1900. And one of his rst ideas
was to transfer his ignorance of the blackbody law from radiation to
matter. He assumed that the walls of the cavity were made of
molecules that would vibrate at a certain frequency in response to
the EM radiation that fell upon them. Then by a clever argument he
related the density of the energy of EM radiation at a given
frequency (his goal), to the average energy of the vibrating molecules
at the same frequency.3 He thus no longer had to deal with
Maxwell’s equations describing the electromagnetic waves; he could
assume that Newton’s laws held for the molecular vibrations, and he
could use statistical mechanics. However, instead of doing the
obvious thing and calculating the average energy of a molecule from
statistical mechanics à la Boltzmann, he chose to nd the entropy of
the molecules.
He did this for a strange historical reason. When he began
studying blackbody radiation in 1895, he hoped to nd the missing
principle that would restore the perfection of the Second Law and
make the increase of entropy and hence the arrow of time an
absolute principle of nature. While he had been convinced that the

equations of matter allowed for entropy to decrease (although very
rarely!), he hoped that those of Maxwell would prevent this from
ever happening. This turned out to be a vain hope, as Boltzmann
himself was able to demonstrate to Planck. However, having
committed himself to the study of the entropy of radiation, and
since the actual radiation law was still not de nitively known,
Planck continued his investigations. He knew that if he could nd
the average entropy of thermal radiation, it was related by
straightforward mathematical steps to the average energy density,
and hence to the correct radiation law.
At rst Planck made an incorrect argument, which did not rely
on Boltzmann’s principle. This led him to what was then called the
Planck-Wien4 radiation law, and the embarrassing retraction in
October 1900 after that law was ruled out by the experiments of his
friends Rubens and Kurlbaum. At that point, guided by their
experimental results and his mathematical intuition, as we saw
earlier, he guessed the right form of the radiation law. Now,
working backward from his apparently correct guess for the energy
density of the radiation, he could gure out what the corresponding
mathematical expression for the entropy of the radiation had to be.
So this distinguished physicist was in a position oddly familiar to
novice physics students, who might nd the correct answer to a
problem listed in the solutions at the back of their textbook but
can’t quite gure out how to get that answer based on the principles
they are supposed to have learned.
Faced with this quandary, for the rst time in his career Planck
resorted to Boltzmann’s principle. By accepting and using that
principle (the formula S = k log W), he now had an approach to
justify his empirical guess from the fundamental laws of statistical
physics. What he needed to do was to count the possible states of
molecular vibration, W, and show that when plugged into
Boltzmann’s formula, it gave the answer that he “knew” was correct.
The mathematical problem he faced can be posed as follows.
Planck assumed that all the molecules in the walls of the blackbody
cavity had a xed total amount of energy, which we can think of as

a quantity of liquid, such as ten gallons of milk. For simplicity,
imagine that there are one hundred molecules in the walls and that
each molecule corresponds to a container that can hold up to the
entire ten gallons. The question is how many ways can the ten
gallons be shared among the hundred containers? If milk (and
energy) are assumed to be continuous, in nitely divisible quantities,
then the obvious answer is an in nite number of ways. But this
didn’t deter Planck. The number of places you can put a gas
molecule in a box is also in nite, but Boltzmann had found that his
answer for the entropy of a system didn’t depend in any important
way on how he divided the box into smaller boxes. So Planck
essentially put little tick marks on the molecular energy containers,
saying, for our imaginary example, that milk could only be
distributed one uid ounce at a time. Now he could go ahead and
calculate the nite number of ways the milk could be shared and
how that number depended on both the total amount of milk (the
energy), the number of containers (molecules), and the size of the
tick marks (the minimum “quantum” of energy). He was expecting
that, as for Boltzmann’s gas calculation, nothing crucial would
depend on the size of the tick marks. He was mistaken.
Try as he might, if he let the spacing of the tick marks get
smaller and smaller, the calculation yielded the wrong entropy and
the wrong radiation law. Finally he was forced to the conclusion
that there must be some smallest spacing of the tick marks, that is,
that energy could only be distributed among the molecules in some
smallest “quantized” unit. Since there was absolutely zero
justi cation for this nal hypothesis, it is clear why Planck called it
“an act of desperation.” To his credit, however, Planck did not shy
away from stating clearly his unprecedented conclusion in his
famous lecture of December 14, 1900, on the blackbody law:
We consider, however—this is the most essential point of the whole
calculation—[the energy] E to be composed of a very de nite
number of equal parts and use thereto the constant of nature h

= 6.55 × 10−27 erg-sec. This constant, multiplied by the
frequency ν … gives us the energy element, ε.
Now we can understand fully this cryptic statement. The
“de nite number of equal parts” were the “tick marks,” that is, the
minimum quantum of molecular vibrational energy, ε. Moreover it
was clear from other considerations that in order to get the right
radiation law, this minimum energy must be proportional to the
frequency at which the molecules vibrated; thus he was forced to
the conclusion that ε = hν. Here the Greek letter ν stands for the
vibration frequency, and h (as Planck says) is a new constant of
nature, undreamt of in our previous natural philosophies. Finally,
because the radiation law was measured experimentally, he could
go to the data and quickly gure out the actual value of the constant
h (quoted above), which is now known as Planck’s constant and is
the signature of all things quantum.
Planck later said that the radiation law had to be justi ed “no
matter how high the cost.” Although he didn’t emphasize it at the
time, the cost was very high. Planck’s little, technical fudge, if taken
seriously, said something very, very strange about forces and motion
at the atomic scale. It said that the Newtonian picture could not be
right. For all intents and purposes, Planck had described molecules
as little balls on springs, which stored energy by being compressed,
and when the springs vibrated the energy was transferred back and
forth between this stored (potential) energy and the kinetic energy
of motion of the molecules, but in such a way that the sum of these
energies, the total energy, was conserved. This much is standard
Newtonian physics.
But in Newtonian physics the initial amount of total energy can
vary continuously; all you need to do is compress the spring a little
more, and it will have a little more energy. The fact that it can have
any amount of energy (between some limits) appears intuitively to
be related to the very fact that space is continuous. Nothing in
Newtonian physics could explain quantized amounts of energy, the
idea that the spring could only be compressed, say, precisely 1 or 2

or 3 or … inches but nothing in between. This was like imagining a
car that can only go 0, 10, 20, … miles per hour and nothing in
between. The obvious question is: how does it get from 0 to 10
miles per hour without passing through the intermediate values as it
accelerates?
There was nothing innocent about Planck’s explanation of the
radiation law. If it were the real explanation, it was a time bomb
hidden in a thicket of algebra, which would explode with earthshattering implications. Atoms and molecules were not little Newtonian
billiard balls; they obeyed completely di erent and counterintuitive laws.
But Planck did not insist that his quantum hypothesis was a
statement about the real mechanics of actual molecules. In fact he
dropped a small hint in his lecture that perhaps energy is not really
quantized. He denoted the total energy of his molecules as E and
stated, “dividing E by ε we get the number P of energy elements
which must be divided over the N resonators [molecules]. If this
ratio is not an integer, we take for P an integer in the neighborhood”
(italics added). But if molecular vibrations were really quantized,
then E/ε would have to be a whole number! Planck was hedging his
bets, signaling that one didn’t have to take this crazy energy
element too seriously. Planck thought the constant of nature he had
discovered, h, was very important, but there is no evidence that he
believed his derivation invalidated Newtonian mechanics on the
atomic scale.
Why not? Theoretical physics is a tricky business; sometimes one
can get the right answer with assumptions that are wrong, or at
least with stronger assumptions than one really needs. Perhaps
another line of argument would occur to Planck, one that would
preserve the welcome constant h but dispense with the
uncomfortable assumption of the energy quantum, ε. Perhaps this
weird, apparent quantization of energy only involved the interaction
of radiation with matter but not mechanics per se. After all, there
had been no obvious evidence of Planck’s constant in other areas of
physics. It could be a new embarrassment if he trumpeted this
energy quantum as a breakthrough in atomic physics and it turned

out not to be so. No, best to play it safe, thought Planck; no need to
cry wolf.
So, remarkably, Planck said nothing more in print for ve full
years about his great discovery, and the strange assumption buried
in his derivation remained almost unnoticed. Except in Bern. There
the unknown patent clerk’s searching investigations into the
foundations of statistical mechanics were placing Planck’s Rube
Goldberg mechanism on the witness stand and returning a verdict:
not innocent.
1

Experts will know that in this equation the base of the logarithm is not the usual base 10
version, but is what is called the natural logarithm. The di erence is not essential for
understanding the meaning of entropy.
2

In chapters 24–25 we will learn that under certain circumstances the method for counting
the states of quantum gases can di er from this classical reasoning. However, Boltzmann’s
equation for entropy still holds, just with a di erent counting method for W.
3

Planck did not call his vibrating entities molecules but used the term “resonators” instead
to emphasize that they were idealized microscopic oscillators and that he was not
committing himself to any atomic theory. At this point the composition of the atom, with a
compact nucleus and electrons bound to it, was not known, although, as we saw from
Maxwell, the concept of atoms and molecules was widely accepted by the leading
statistical physicists of the time.
4

Recall that after Planck came up with his new radiation law, which agreed with
experiment, his name became attached to the new correct law and was dropped from the
older law, now referred to as simply Wien’s law.

CHAPTER 8

THOSE FABULOUS
MOLECULES
One of the great open questions in the history of science is
how Einstein came to the core idea of his paradigm-shifting paper of
1905. No, not his paper on special relativity or his paper proposing
the famous equation E = mc2. Einstein was asked over and over
again how he had developed the key insights leading to the special
and general theories of relativity, and he answered with various
charming anecdotes that have become part of his legend. As far as
we know, he never went on record as to how he came up with the
basic conception for his rst paper of the annus mirabilis, a radical
alternative to Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetic waves, which is
the only one of his discoveries that he himself labeled as
“revolutionary.” He says nothing directly about how he arrived at
his rst work on quantum theory in either his contemporary
correspondence or in the papers preceding it. However, there are a
few clues in the historical record, and these suggest that the key
insight was his realization that the Planck radiation law was
absolutely incompatible with statistical mechanics, at least in the
form developed by Maxwell, Boltzmann, and Gibbs. This
understanding likely matured during the year 1904 and early in
1905, when he was living a comfortable married life with Mileva
and, as he was unknown to the wider physics community, his
scienti c correspondence was quite thin, leaving few traces of his
profound ruminations.
As already mentioned, by 1903 Einstein had settled into his
routine in Bern, working six days a week at the patent o ce, giving

private lessons, and nonetheless nding time to pursue research in
fundamental physics. Later he would refer to this period as “those
happy Bernese years.” With his charisma and joie de vivre he had
very quickly acquired a group of comrades who would share this
idyllic interlude with him. The rst of these new companions was a
Romanian philosophy student, Maurice Solovine, who showed up at
his at in response to Einstein’s earnest advertisement for private
physics lessons. A typical Einsteinian episode ensued. Following an
enthusiastic invitation to enter his humble abode, Solovine was
immediately “struck by the extraordinary brilliance of his large
eyes.” Two and a half hours passed in a twinkling as the men
discussed science and philosophy, and by the next session Einstein,
having quite forgotten the original pro t motive, declared physics
lessons too much of a bother and proposed instead that they should
meet freely to discuss ideas of all sorts. Very soon they added to
their ranks another young aspiring intellectual, Conrad Habicht, a
mathematics student, who had attended the Poly a bit ahead of
Einstein and whose acquaintance Einstein had made during his
vagabond years after graduation.
Habicht had the most jovial and high-spirited relationship with
Einstein of all his peers; their letters to each other are rife with
playful sarcasm. Together with Solovine, the two men founded a
reading and discussion group, which they satirically dubbed the
“Olympia Academy.” Habicht graciously allowed Einstein the
esteemed position of president, complete with a commemorative
(cartoon) bust and a grandiloquent dedication in Latin, celebrating
his unerring command of “those fabulous molecules.” It was also
Habicht who dubbed our Valiant Swabian “Albert Ritter von
Steissbein,” which loosely translates as “Knight of the Tailbone,”
presenting him with an engraved tin plate bearing this title. Far
from being o ended, Einstein and Mileva “laughed so much they
thought they would die,” and henceforth Albert occasionally signed
letters to Habicht with this sobriquet. The heraldic crest above his
bust is aptly chosen: a link of sausages, one of the few foodstu s the
Olympians could a ord to eat at their august gatherings.

Despite the evident joviality of the meetings, the members, along
with occasional guests such as the attentive but silent Mileva, took
their studies very seriously, and Einstein acquired many of his
lasting philosophical views during the two years of meetings. The
group would convene at the apartment of one of the members, and
over a frugal repast would debate the meaning and merits of the
assigned works, which included philosophy (David Hume and John
Stuart Mill), history and philosophy of science (Henri Poincaré and
Ernst Mach), and occasionally great literature (Don Quixote and
Antigone).

FIGURE 8.1. (a) Hand-drawn cartoon by Maurice Solovine celebrating Einstein as
President of the Olympia Academy, with his bust garlanded in hanging sausages. (b)
Satirical inscription in Latin that accompanied the cartoon. It translates as “The man of
Hechingen, expert in the noble arts, versed in all literary forms – leading the age towards
learning, a man perfectly and clearly erudite, imbued with exquisite, subtle and elegant
knowledge, steeped in the revolutionary science of the cosmos, bursting with knowledge of
natural things, a man with the greatest peace of mind and marvelous family virtue, never
shrinking from civic duties, the powerful guide to those fabulous receptive molecules,
infallible high priest of the poor in spirit.” Courtesy the Albert Einstein Archive.

Solovine recalled that these gatherings brimmed over with
merriment, although woe to him who would slight the gravity of the
occasion. On one memorable night, Solovine, having skipped out on

a meeting at the last minute to attend a concert, returned to his
apartment to nd his bed piled high with furniture and household
items, his room enveloped in thick cigar smoke, and a scolding note
in Latin pinned to his wall. Einstein remembered these get-togethers
with the greatest fondness. In 1953 he wrote to Solovine:

FIGURE 8.2. The principals of the Olympia Academy circa 1903; on the left is Conrad
Habicht, center is Maurice Solovine, and on the right is Einstein. ETH-Bibliothek Zurich,
Image Archive.

To the immortal Olympia Academy!
In your short active life dear Academy, you took delight, with
childlike joy, in all that was clear and intelligent. Your members
created you to make fun of the long-established sister academies.
How well your mockery hit the mark I have learned to
appreciate through long years of careful observation…. Even if
we have become somewhat decrepit, a glimmer of your bright,
vivifying radiance still lights our lonely pilgrimage…. To you our
delity and devotion until the last learned gasp!

A. E.—now corresponding member
Besides Habicht and Solovine, Einstein had another intellectual
con dant in Michele Besso. He had met Besso, who was six years
older and already a graduate of the Poly, while he was a student in
Zurich. Besso, of middle-class Jewish origin, was an engineer, who
had applied for and obtained a position in the patent o ce in Bern
at Einstein’s suggestion. Einstein had also introduced him to his
eventual wife, Anna Winteler, who was a daughter of Einstein’s host
family in Aarau. Besso and Einstein became lifelong and intimate
friends. If Einstein occasionally exhibited the absentmindedness of a
starry-eyed dreamer, he was an absolute model of Swiss e ciency
compared with the impractical Besso, whose boss had once
pronounced him “completely useless and almost unbalanced.”
Einstein, while granting that in many respects Michele was “an
awful schlemiel,” nonetheless enjoyed and pro ted from their
exchanges: “[Besso] has an extraordinarily ne mind whose
working, though disorderly, I watch with great delight.” Later, when
re ecting upon his achievements of 1905, he said that he “could not
have found a better sounding-board in the whole of Europe.” Besso
and Einstein walked home together daily during that period, and
Einstein shared with him his developing ideas about physics.
Although Besso is often mentioned as the rst to hear about
relativity theory, apparently the main subject of their conversations
was something else: Einstein’s new hypothesis about the nature of
light.
This hypothesis surely would have been presented to the
Olympia Academy; however, by the end of 1904, Habicht had
obtained a post as a mathematics and physics teacher in Schiers,
quite a distance from Bern, and in 1905 Solovine moved from Bern
to Paris, where he worked on a journal, the Revue Philosophique.
Hence the academy was out of session as Einstein was producing his
string of hits. In May of 1905 he sent a typical jocular missive to
Habicht, whose absence he had felt:

Dear Habicht, such a solemn air of silence has descended
between us that I almost feel as if I am committing a sacrilege
when I break it now with some inconsequential babble….
So what are you up to you frozen whale, you smoked, dried,
canned piece of soul…? Why have you still not sent me your
dissertation? Don’t you know that I am one of the 1½ fellows
that would read it with interest and pleasure, you wretched
man?
I promise you four papers in return, the rst … deals with
radiation and the energy properties of light and is very
revolutionary…. The fourth paper is still only a rough draft at this
point, and is an electrodynamics of moving bodies which
employs a modi cation of the theory of space and time.
This lively discourse indicates Einstein’s contemporaneous
valuation of his great works of 1905; they were all exciting, and he
was proud of them, but one was actually revolutionary, the one on
the quantum properties of light. This paper, titled “On a Heuristic
Point of View Concerning the Production and Transformation of
Light,” grew out of his last work on statistical mechanics, in which
he had focused for the rst time on Planck’s theory of radiation, the
theory that required the critical but unappreciated introduction of a
smallest energy element, ε = hν.
Recall that Planck had avoided the question of whether he was
allowed to apply statistical mechanics to radiation by relating the
radiation energy, which he wanted to calculate, to the average
energy of vibrating molecules in the blackbody. But instead of
directly calculating this energy, he took the odd detour of
calculating the entropy of the molecules, and, with full knowledge of
the answer he had to get in order to agree with experiment, he
wrestled the entropy into the correct form, using the outré
assumption of a minimal energy element. Given Einstein’s focus on
statistical mechanics, which, unaware of Gibbs’s prior work, he
thought he was extending in a novel manner beyond gases, he

would naturally focus on the place at which Planck took his detour.
Why not just calculate the average energy of a molecule?
In this context, what is needed is the average “thermal energy”
of the molecule. If we imagine the molecule as consisting of several
atoms connected by chemical bonds, which can vibrate just like
macroscopic springs, and if it were possible to direct energy to a
particular isolated molecule, then according to the classical view
one can tune the energy to any desired value (until it gets so large
that the molecule breaks apart). However, Planck had appended the
ad hoc restriction that each vibration could only have certain energy
values, constrained to be a whole number times hν (although it
wasn’t really clear he believed wholeheartedly in this constraint).
Nonetheless, in either view, the energy of any speci c molecule was
something that could and would vary in time, whatever the
temperature of the surroundings. But each molecule is typically in
contact with other molecules through collisions (in the gaseous
state) or mutual vibrations in the solid state, so that if the material’s
temperature is xed, each molecule has a de nite average energy
that does depend on the temperature of the surrounding
environment and is termed the thermal energy.
Several times in his papers on statistical mechanics Einstein had
already done a calculation for the kinetic part of the average
thermal energy, the contribution of molecular velocity to the total
thermal energy. It was a trivial generalization of those calculations
to consider a molecule that vibrates back and forth and hence also
has potential energy. Potential energy is just that—energy stored by
doing work against a force. Continuing the spring analogy, when a
mass on a spring is pulled and then clamped at a greater extension,
potential energy is stored in the mass, which can be released when
the mass is unpinned and oscillates back and forth. When a
molecule vibrates, its chemical bonds are compressed and stretched
like a spring, alternately storing and releasing potential energy. In
this case, according to Maxwell/Boltzmann/Einstein statistical
mechanics, the average potential and kinetic energies are equal and
have a simple relation to temperature, Emol = kT, where k is

Boltzmann’s constant (the same one that comes into the formula for
the entropy, S = k log W), and T is the temperature.1 Note that this
average thermal energy is independent of the frequency.
It may initially seem counterintuitive that two identical masses
connected to springs that vibrate at very di erent frequencies (i.e.,
have di erent degrees of sti ness) can have on average the same
energy. The high-frequency vibrating mass will oscillate faster, and
thus will have higher kinetic energy, which, for an oscillator, also
must be equal on average to its potential energy. Thus it should just
have more total energy, right? No, because the two springs will also
vibrate di erent distances from their unstretched positions. The
relation Emol = kT tells us that the high-frequency molecule must
make smaller-amplitude vibrations than the low-frequency
molecule, in just such a way that the average energy of the two is
equal. This statement of classical statistical mechanics, that all
vibrating structures have the same average energy, has a fancy
name: the equipartition theorem; it implies that the total energy of the
system is equally shared by each microscopic part. This theorem will
be very important in Einstein’s reasoning going forward.
Since Einstein had by now developed a great understanding of
classical statistical mechanics, he surely would have leaned initially
toward the “obvious” equipartition formula: Emol = kT, which via
Planck’s reasoning would immediately yield a hypothesis for the
radiation law. However, as we shall soon see, using the hypothesis
so obtained gives a paradoxical result, so Einstein at some point
rejected this approach. Planck’s route, on the other hand, involved
an obvious fudge, the ad hoc hypothesis of a minimal energy
element, with no fundamental justi cation at all. This dead end is
the point at which ordinary mortals would have thrown up their
hands and given up. Instead, in one of the greatest demonstrations
of exible thinking ever, Einstein abandoned his beloved classical
statistical mechanics and opened his mind to a new and bizarre
possibility, the possibility that the hallowed Maxwell equations,
whose perfection he had long admired, were not the nal word on
the nature of light.

1

Here and elsewhere I assume that temperature is measured using the absolute (kelvin)
scale, where it is always a positive number.

CHAPTER 9

TRIPPING THE LIGHT
HEURISTIC
“The wave [Maxwell] theory of light … has proved itself
splendidly in describing purely optical phenomena and probably
will never be replaced by another theory…. [However] it is
conceivable that … the [wave] theory of light may lead to
contradictions with experience when it is applied to the phenomena
of production and transformation of light. Indeed it seems to me
that
the
observations
regarding
‘blackbody
radiation,’
photoluminescence, and [the photoelectric e ect] … can be
understood better if one assumes that the energy of light is
discontinuously distributed in space. According to the assumption to
be contemplated here, when a light ray is spreading from a point, the
energy is not distributed continuously over ever-increasing spaces, but
consists of a nite number of energy quanta that are localized in points
in space, move without dividing, and can be absorbed or generated only
as a whole” (italics added).
With these comments Einstein began his paper that presented a
“heuristic point of view” (not a theory) on the production and
transformation of light. A noted Einstein biographer has called the
last statement of this quotation “the most revolutionary sentence
written by a physicist of the twentieth century.” There had been no
signi cant work on a particulate view of light since Newton’s theory
of light as granular was de nitively refuted in the early part of the
nineteenth century. Thus Einstein’s work has no real antecedents; it
is a bolt from the blue. In contrast, what became special relativity
theory was very much in the air by 1905, and when Einstein wrote

his rst paper on that topic, four months later, it involved a new
derivation of mathematical properties of space and time that had
already been written down by Lorentz (albeit without the radical
interpretation given to them by Einstein).
The paper hypothesizing that light could be conceived of as a
stream of particles (which Einstein called “quanta” and which we
now refer to as “photons”) is seventeen pages long and consists of
an introduction and nine numbered sections. It is clearly written
and would have been relatively easy to understand for an expert like
Planck (who was theory editor for the journal). The paper makes a
number of assertions, both qualitative and quantitative, about
experimental phenomena that can be understood from the new
point of view it puts forward but are puzzling when viewed from the
vantage point of Maxwell’s theory. Astoundingly, every statement in
this paper is correct when assessed on the basis of our modern
quantum theory of radiation and its interaction with matter.
While Einstein discusses experiments related to light extensively
in the paper, this is not how he begins. Instead, he starts with the
theoretical consideration already mentioned, that classical statistical
mechanics fails to describe blackbody radiation. In this rst section,
titled “On a di culty encountered in the theory of blackbody
radiation,” he explains, in a manner similar to Planck’s, that to
analyze the energy density of blackbody radiation, one does not
need to assume statistical mechanics applies to thermal radiation.
Instead, since the radiation is always exchanging energy with
matter, one needs only to gure out the average energy per
molecule of a gas in contact with electrons, which then emit light
(here, ironically, he refers to the “sad specimen” of Drude and his
electron theory for support). Having established this, he goes right
to the point: classical statistical mechanics insists that the energy
per molecule is kT. End of story. He then invokes Planck’s own
equation, which says that the blackbody energy density at frequency
ν, which he denotes by the Greek letter ρ, is proportional to this
molecular energy, for which Planck had substituted, not kT, but a
totally di erent answer, which he had gotten by working backward

from his entropy calculation. But, Einstein points out, if one instead
sticks with the answer Emol = kT, the only answer that makes sense
according to classical reasoning, there is a problem with the total
energy of the radiation. Actually, a really big problem: the total
energy summed over all the frequencies of radiation is in nite. Even
though physicists toss around in nities nonchalantly, we are still
not allowed to have an in nite answer for something you can
measure. The total energy coming out of a nite-size blackbody had
been measured; it obeys a known relation, called the StefanBoltzmann law,1 and it is most assuredly nite. So the obvious
approach gives an impossible result.
The source of the impossible answer was easy to trace. In a gas
there is a very large but nite number of molecules; thus each
molecule can have a xed amount of energy, kT, and the total
energy will be some large but nite quantity. In a box with trapped
radiation, however, there are an in nite number of wavelengths of
radiation that t inside the box (remember that the wavelength of
Maxwell radiation can be arbitrarily small). If each wavelength of
radiation carries the same energy, then the total energy adds up to
in nity, just as Einstein found. Is it possible that only some
wavelengths actually get their share of the energy, leaving others
below their thermal quota? No, it is not possible. Since the radiation
and electrons are always interacting, if some wavelengths didn’t get
their “fair share” of the energy, then radiation would continually
suck energy out of matter until all the matter cooled to absolute
zero. Much later the physicist Paul Ehrenfest2 came up with a
catchy name for this phenomenon: the ultraviolet catastrophe (almost
all the energy should ow into the shorter, ultraviolet wavelengths).
Not to worry, it doesn’t happen.
This is the brick wall that Einstein had run into in trying to
explain blackbody radiation from statistical mechanics. The only
answer you can get from Newtonian mechanics and
Maxwell/Boltzmann theory is not just wrong (i.e., out of agreement
with experiment); it is absurd. This was why Planck had to twist
himself into knots and introduce “energy elements” to get his

answer. Einstein had major reservations about this gimmick, and
had devised a means to make his conjectures about quanta of light
without committing himself to whether there was any truth in
Planck’s notion.
Despite his reservations about Planck’s method for deriving his
radiation law, Einstein treats Planck quite delicately in his paper.
One might have expected that the angry young maverick who had
confronted Drude and Boltzmann about their supposed errors would
have liked nothing more than to emphasize the shortcomings of
Planck’s approach in print. Planck had tiptoed to the very edge of
the ultraviolet catastrophe when he noted that his smallest energy
constant, h, could not be taken arbitrarily small (which would have
restored the continuous nature of energy). If it were so taken, one
would immediately encounter Einstein’s absurd result for the total
radiation energy; however, Planck had not seen t to mention the
menace he had narrowly escaped. Einstein had discovered that the
kaiser Planck had no clothes, and who better than him to tell the
world?
However, a cryptic comment by Besso much later, in 1928, sheds
light on his change of tone: “On my side, I have been your public
during the years 1904, 1905; by helping you to edit your
communications on the problem of quanta, I deprived you of some
of your glory; but on the other hand, I procured you a friend,
Planck.” It appears that Besso prevailed on Einstein to revise an
earlier version of this paper in which more pointed comments were
made about the correctness of Planck’s derivation. Besso is on
target: he probably did deprive Einstein of some of his glory; had
Einstein been more direct in discussing Planck’s work, his own role
as the rst person to propose seriously the quantization of energy,
as a property of atomic mechanics, would have been much clearer.
At any rate, in the published version of the paper Einstein
con nes himself to the innocuous comment, “Planck’s formula for
ρ(ν) … has been su cient to account for all observations made so
far.” Einstein is not trying to determine the correct radiation law
here anyway, but instead his goal is interpreting the meaning of this

law, which apparently is correct but, as he has just shown, con icts
with atomistic theory as then conceived. To do this he nds it
su cient to consider only the shorter wavelengths of thermal
radiation, and to use for convenience the older Wien law, which
fails for the longer wavelengths but actually ts the data very well
in the short-wavelength, high-frequency range.3 Assuming that
Wien’s law is approximately correct, he can work backward à la
Planck and nd the approximate entropy of blackbody radiation. He
nds something very striking. The mathematical equation for this
entropy is identical to that of a molecular gas, except that where the
number, N, of gas molecules would appear in the formula for the
molecular entropy, the expression E/hν appears for the blackbody
entropy (where E is the total energy of the radiation of frequency ν).
Einstein makes the immediate connection: if light consists of a train
of particles (“quanta”) each of energy hν, then E/hν is the number of
those quanta, and the blackbody entropy behaves exactly like a gas
of independent molecules. In other words, the short-wavelength
limit of the blackbody law suggests that light has particulate
properties!
Of course this is not a proof. The only laws physicists believed at
the time give the absurd answer for the total radiation energy
(in nity) that he has already stated at the beginning of the paper.
Thus Einstein doesn’t know any more fundamental way of justifying
his light-quanta hypothesis than through the mathematical analogy
he has just given. However, this picture, even in the absence of the
new and more accurate set of atomic laws that must underlie it, is
enough to explain many puzzling experimental observations.
Here is how he was able to do this. First, he assumed (correctly)
that whatever the new laws were, energy is still conserved. Energy
conservation means that whenever some energy is given up by
something (e.g., a molecule or a light wave), that energy is
transferred to some other physical object or process so that energy is
not created or destroyed, just redistributed.4 His new picture
implied that light transfers energy to matter in a di erent way than
in the Maxwell wave picture. In classical physics the energy in a

wave is proportional to its intensity, which is proportional to the
square of the maximum height of the wave. This makes a lot of
sense intuitively. Waves are disturbances in a medium that transport
energy from one region in the medium to another. For example,
water waves bring energy into the shore from winds in the oceans.
We all can see that a gnarly thirty-footer brings in more energy than
a ve-foot swell; we instinctively measure the power of waves by
their height. This is exactly how the energy of a light wave is
measured in the classical wave theory of electromagnetism, their
“height” being the strength of their electric eld.
Einstein was proposing a radical reimagining of this on the
atomic level. He proposed that the light wave really is a train of
particles (of inde nite but presumably very small size), the quanta,
which, because of their localized nature, can interact and exchange
energy only with individual atoms or molecules. The intensity or
height of the light wave tells one how many quanta the wave
contains in a certain region of space, but it doesn’t determine the
energy of each quantum of light. Instead, the energy of the quanta
depends only on the frequency (or wavelength) of the wave
according to the relation εquant = hν. This is just the Planck relation,
but not for the energy of the molecular vibrations, rather for the
quanta of light (photons).
Notice how strange this conclusion is from the point of view of
the traditional wave picture. The frequency of a water wave just
determines its wavelength (the spacing of the crests), which doesn’t
a ect how much energy is transferred each time a crest crashes on
the beach. Einstein agreed that higher-intensity light waves carry
more total energy (because they consist of more quanta), but
carrying more quanta matters little for how they interact with a
single molecule or atom. That is because it is very improbable that
two quanta will “meet” at the same point at the same time and thus
be able to transfer twice as much energy to the same molecule.5 So,
in his new picture, what can happen in such a transfer is controlled
by the frequency of the light and not its intensity.

Suddenly very puzzling observations made perfect sense.
Einstein’s rst example was a phenomenon involving the absorption
of light known as the Stokes rule. George Gabriel Stokes, born in the
Irish county of Sligo in 1819, was the rst of the three great
Cambridge mathematical physicists6 of the nineteenth century,
along with Maxwell and William Thomson (later named Lord
Kelvin). One of his most famous discoveries was that certain
substances, when they absorbed light would “ uoresce”; that is,
they would reemit the light, not as blackbody radiation, for which
the wavelength is determined by temperature, but rather as visible
light. However, Stokes noted that the reemitted light was always of
a lower frequency (longer wavelength) than the absorbed light: this
is the Stokes rule. Most dramatically, many substances could absorb
ultraviolet (invisible) incident radiation and shift it down to lower
frequencies in the visible range (this e ect is now used as a key
diagnostic probe in modern chemistry and biochemistry). Ironically,
Stokes never published his famous rule;7 instead Thomson
announced it in 1883 but gave Stokes full credit for the discovery.
This rule makes no sense from the classical wave point of view.
Since the energy in a classical light wave has nothing to do with its
frequency, why can’t a conversion of light to higher frequency
sometimes happen? After all, the frequencies at which molecules
emit light presumably have something to do with how tightly the
atoms are bonded together, how the molecules vibrate, and so on. If
the light wave is dumping energy in and it is being reemitted as a
new light wave, then shouldn’t it come out at whatever the natural
frequencies of emission are for that molecule, independent of
whatever frequency is used to dump the energy in? (Perhaps this
obvious conundrum deterred Stokes from publishing, since there
was no reasonable explanation for his rule.) Einstein’s quantum
picture handles this with ease.
If the best a molecule can do is absorb all the energy in one
quantum of light, then the most energetic quantum it can reemit
will have at most the same energy, and hence the same frequency;
however, absorption almost always is accompanied by some amount

of energy lost to the molecule (a sort of molecular friction), so in
fact the highest energy and hence the highest frequency that can be
reemitted is always lower. Einstein realizes that this conclusion is
quite general: “it makes no di erence by what kind of intermediate
process this end result [the emission of a photon] is mediated. If the
photoluminescent substance is not to be regarded as a permanent
source of energy, then, according to [conservation of energy], the
energy of the produced energy quantum cannot be greater than that
of the producing energy quantum, hence we must have [the
produced frequency less than or equal to the producing one]. This is
the well-known Stokes rule.”
This was a very nice rst exing of Einstein’s quantum muscles,
but it was still just a qualitative explanation for something that was
already known. His idea was so radical that it would take something
more to get people to take it even a little bit seriously. Fortunately,
he comes up with a more dramatic example and quantitative
prediction in the next section of the paper. The great German
physicist Heinrich Hertz, the
rst demonstrator of Maxwell
radiation, had also discovered by accident a phenomenon that
would ultimately spell the downfall of pure Maxwellian
electrodynamics. This phenomenon is called the “photoelectric
e ect.”
When light, particularly blue or ultraviolet light, is incident on
and absorbed by a substance, yet another process can occur (besides
the emission of blackbody radiation or the uorescence of lowerfrequency Stokes radiation). Sometimes the substance can eject an
energetic “cathode ray,” which by that time had been identi ed as a
speeding electron. These fast electrons can be collected and run
through a circuit to generate a “photocurrent.” The same principle is
operative in all modern solar cells, except that the electrons are not
ejected from the material but are just promoted to a higher energy
state, where they move much more freely and can be extracted as
electrical energy in a circuit. By exactly the same kind of reasoning
he had applied to the Stokes rule, Einstein explained the
photoelectric e ect. He analyzed the consequences of conservation

of energy, combined with the principle that only one quantum of
light can interact with one electron at a time.
First, it always takes some energy to knock electrons out of a
solid. The electrons are trapped by their attraction to positively
charged atoms and also by the surfaces of the material, so they need
to absorb extra energy to be kicked out into space. This energy is
pretty large on the atomic scale, comparable to the amount of
energy in one quantum of blue or even ultraviolet light. So if one
bathes the material in a beam of red light (no matter how intense),
since each quantum of red light is individually too feeble, no
photoelectrons are produced. Again, this is totally ba ing from the
classical point of view. From that perspective, the more intense the
red beam is, the more energy it has, and the more likely it should be
to produce photoelectrons. But increasing the red beam’s intensity
does nothing. In contrast, a rather weak beam of ultraviolet light
does produce photoelectrons. A paradox for Maxwell, but not in the
quantum picture—one solitary ultraviolet photon, with its higher
frequency, has enough energy to do the job. So this observation is
immediately explained by Einstein’s light quanta.
But he easily goes further. The ejected photoelectrons are
winging their way toward the collector, which is a metal contact
absorbing electrons and delivering them to the attached circuit. If
this collector is charged with a large enough negative voltage, the
electrons are repelled and the photocurrent ceases. A simple further
application of conservation of energy allows Einstein to predict that
this “stopping voltage” is precisely proportional to the frequency of
the light. In other words, if you make a graph of stopping voltage
versus frequency, it is a perfectly straight line with a speci c value
for its slope. And what is that value? It is exactly Planck’s constant,
h, for any material! Now that was a strong and precise prediction.
Moreover, it was an interesting and surprising prediction
because it moved Planck’s constant, h, from the arena of thermal
radiation to the seemingly unrelated area of photoelectric
phenomena. It strongly suggested that this constant was of general
signi cance for physics. This is just the kind of thing experimental

physicists love: an important new idea connected to a clear and
easily falsi ed prediction. The statement that stopping voltage must
have a linear dependence on the light beam’s frequency,
independent of its intensity, was bizarre enough. But also the graph
of this line must have a universal, material-independent slope? It
was too good to be true. Surely someone would jump on this.
Except … the photoelectric experiments required were very
di cult, and Einstein, a virtual unknown who was contradicting the
wave theory of light, had hardly more credibility than a crackpot,
whose writings were to be thrown in the wastebasket. And
unfortunately the existing data did not help very much. They did
appear to show the strange dependence on frequency and
independence of intensity that Einstein’s picture explained, but they
were nowhere near accurate enough to verify or contradict his
universal-slope prediction. He was only able to make a rather
hopeful statement: “As far as I can see, our conception does not
con ict with the properties of the photoelectric e ect observed by
[the German physicist Philip Lenard].” Einstein would have to wait
several more years for his quantum of fame.
1

This relation is that the total radiation energy owing out of the surface of a black-body
is J = σT4. It was derived by Boltzmann’s teacher, Josef Stefan, and generalized by
Boltzmann; σ is called the Stefan-Boltzmann constant and its value was known by 1905.
2

Paul Ehrenfest was an Austrian-born Jewish physicist whom Einstein would meet in
Prague in 1912. As Einstein recalled, “within a few hours we were friends, as if made for
one another by our strivings and longings.” Later that year Ehrenfest became a professor at
Leiden and arranged regular visits there by Einstein for the next two decades.
3

In this context, high frequency means that energy element, hν, is larger than the classical
thermal energy, Emol = kT, and low frequency refers to the opposite situation.
4

Later that year Einstein would generalize this rule via the famous equation E= mc2.
Sometimes energy can be transformed into mass and is “lost,” although in principle it can
always be transformed back, so that mass-energy is still conserved. Such e ects are
typically negligible with absorption and emission of light, although essential in nuclear
reactions.
5

While this is improbable for normal beams of light, with the particularly intense beams
generated by modern lasers it becomes much more likely, leading to so-called nonlinear
optical e ects. An important new form of microscopy, known as two-photon microscopy,
which gives superior imaging of living tissue, is based on this new possibility. Einstein is

aware of and mentions the possibility of nonlinear processes involving several photons in
his article but assumes, correctly, that they are rare.
6

None of the three were English: Thomson was born in Belfast in 1824 and Maxwell in
Edinburgh in 1831. Both Stokes and Thomson lived into the twentieth century, whereas
Maxwell, to the great detriment of science, passed away in 1879. Maxwell, now regarded
as the greatest of the three, was the only one not to be knighted.
7

Lord Rayleigh, the successor to these three leaders, commented that Stokes may have
su ered from a “Morbid dread of mistakes,” which inhibited publication.

CHAPTER 10

ENTERTAINING THE
CONTRADICTION
“I do not seek the meaning of the quantum of action (light
quantum) in the vacuum but at the sites of absorption and emission,
and assume that processes in vacuum are described exactly by
Maxwell’s equations.” This was Max Planck’s rst known response
to Einstein’s heuristic theory of light quanta, sent to Einstein in a
letter of July 6, 1907, more than two years after the publication of
the “revolutionary” paper of 1905. Planck must surely have known
of Einstein’s ideas much earlier, since he was the theory editor of
the journal in which they were published, Annalen der Physik.
Unfortunately none of the referee or editorial comments on
Einstein’s papers of 1905 has survived, so we don’t know how direct
a role Planck had in approving them for publication. Planck was
known for being open to publishing scienti c contributions with
which he disagreed, as long as they did not contain clear errors, and
this tolerance likely came into play with Einstein’s paper. Planck
consistently opposed the idea of the particulate nature of light in
vacuum, in a respectful but rm manner, for at least a decade after
its publication. And he was not alone in this attitude; among the
eminent physicists of the time, only Johannes Stark, whose
outstanding work on the photoelectric e ect Einstein had
mentioned, openly supported Einstein’s radical new view of light. In
May of 1909, in response to a letter from Einstein, Lorentz himself
sent a lengthy, technical reply to Einstein, detailing what he saw as
the insuperable problems with his hypothesis. He concludes, “It is a
real pity that the light quantum hypothesis encounters such serious
di culties because otherwise the hypothesis is very pretty, and

many of the applications that you and Stark have made of it are
very enticing.”
What were the “serious di culties” of which Lorentz spoke?
They arose because of the con ict between two basic categories in
the physics of the time: waves and particles. Newton’s laws had
introduced the idea of mass, the quality of a material that resists
change of motion and that responds to and generates gravitational
attraction. Although atomic theory was in its infancy, the idea that
everyday massive objects were made of smaller, more fundamental
building blocks (i.e., atoms and molecules) had been widely used by
physicists since the time of Maxwell and was winning the day by
1905. Atoms were the fundamental particles of physics, although
soon to be understood as made up of protons, neutrons, and
electrons. (Modern physics has added many other particles to this
classi cation and further subdivided the atomic nucleus into
quarks). So the idea that macroscopic “stu ” (solids, liquids, and
gases) is an aggregate of atomic-scale particles was commonplace at
the time of Einstein’s early work.
Moreover, it was clear that when these particles aggregate in
large quantities, such as in an ocean or in the atmosphere, they
create media in which disturbances can propagate, disturbances that
in these cases are called water waves or sound waves. It is important
to realize that the particles of water or air are the substrate in which
the waves propagate; it not possible to generate such “classical”
waves without their substrate (in space no one can hear you
scream). In the classical view, the fundamental objects are the
particles that make up the medium, and the waves are derivative
objects. Moreover, it is critical to understand that these waves are
collective phenomena; waves move through the medium, but the
particles don’t. Waves are not a whole bunch of particles moving in
the same direction.
This is illustrated nicely by a new kind of wave, discovered
sometime in the 1980s, which we will refer to as “fan waves.” In the
classical fan wave the particles are the sports fans in a stadium,
who, because of boredom or some other stimulus, spontaneously

generate collective motion. In an ideal, fully developed, clockwise
fan wave all the fans from the rst to last row in the upper deck
stand up and then sit down in a brief period (about two seconds),
causing, by poorly understood interactions, the fans immediately
next to them on their left to do the same thing immediately
thereafter. This disturbance in the crowd then propagates around
the stadium, creating a nice visual e ect, until it is damped out
either by loss of synchronization or loss of interest. Anyone who has
contributed to such a wave realizes that the particles (the fans) do
not move in the direction of the wave; they just bob up and down. It
is the disturbance, the wave, that propagates, not the “particles” of
the medium.
To this extent fan waves are typical classical waves in a medium.
To complete the analogy, however, we will have to embellish a bit
on the conventional fan wave to allow for a further critical feature,
interference of waves. Imagine that all the fans are standing already
(it is a particularly exciting moment in the game) and can make two
di erent kinds of waves, by either raising their arms above their
heads or lowering them down to their knees, as in a revival meeting.
Also allow for the possibility that waves can go either clockwise or
counterclockwise. You look to your left or right, and if the fan next
to you raises his hands, you do the same; if he lowers them you do
the same as well. Now some wise guy starts a clockwise wave by
raising his hands, and his friend behind him starts simultaneously a
counterclockwise wave by lowering his hands. These two waves
propagate around the stadium in opposite directions at the same
speed, and so halfway around they meet. At the column where they
meet, the fans on the right raise their hands just as the fans on the
left lower theirs: the fans in the middle don’t know what to do. So
they do nothing. The two waves have met up, “out of phase” as the
physicists say, and they cancel each other out.
This is a somewhat fanciful illustration of the interference of
waves, which are extended disturbances in a medium, having both
an amplitude (how big the wave is at any given point) and a phase
(how close the wave is to a peak or a trough at any given point).

Depending on their phases, waves interfere and are larger where the
crests coincide and smaller (or zero) where a crest and peak
coincide. This is the sine qua non of a wave. But note that when we
have destructive interference and two waves cancel out, the
particles of the medium are still there (i.e., the fans in our example);
they are just undisturbed. Waves are disturbances, so they can be
positive or negative and can cancel each other out; you can add one
and one and get zero. Particles cannot. (Two fans claiming a single
seat will create destructive interference, but of a di erent kind.)
This was how all waves were conceived of until 1905. However,
a major challenge to this understanding was implicit in Maxwell’s
discovery of electromagnetic waves. Here the propagating
disturbance was an electric and magnetic eld, but there was no
obvious medium in which it could propagate. Physicists since the
time of Newton had hypothesized that heat and possibly even light
propagated through a transparent medium known as the “ether.”
Maxwell’s discovery now con rmed its existence and that it was the
substrate through which all EM waves propagated.
The absolute necessity for such a medium was so evident that
Heinrich Hertz, the rst to demonstrate reception and transmission
of radio waves, expressed it thus: “Take electricity out of our world
and light vanishes; take the luminiferous ether out of our world and
electric and magnetic elds can no longer travel through space.”
This medium was, however, highly problematic. Despite its
stubborn invisibility, it had to be all-pervasive, since apparently EM
waves could propagate everywhere. It couldn’t have much (if any)
mass, because it would then have gravitational e ects, which were
not in evidence. And since the earth moves in di erent directions at
di erent times of year, the velocity of light on earth should vary in
some manner, just as a water wave appears to move more slowly to
a boat moving in the same direction. However, experiments testing
the speed of light showed no hint of this e ect.
But what choice did one have other than postulating an ether?
Try creating a fan wave in an empty stadium. You don’t have to be
an Einstein to see that you can’t have the wave without the medium.

It turns out, however, that you do have to be Einstein to suggest that
you can have the wave without the medium.
As noted above, the familiar waves of classical physics, which
propagate as a disturbance in a medium, look di erent to an
observer moving with respect to that medium. The surfer on the
crest of a water wave sees an almost stationary wall of water roiling
around him. By the same logic the young Einstein, in his school days
at Aarau, had imagined moving along next to a light wave at the
speed c and seeing a stationary electric eld that no longer
oscillated. This apparently conceivable physical situation made no
sense to him: “But such a thing does not seem to exist, either on the
grounds of experience or according to the Maxwellian equations.”
The leading theorists of the time, Lorentz and the French
mathematical physicist Henri Poincaré, grappled with this
conundrum and, while making major mathematical advances, kept
the physical picture of electromagnetic waves tied to the ether.
Einstein also pondered this puzzle on and o during his student
years and afterward, and it was nally in May of 1905, two months
after he had submitted his paper on light quanta, that the answer
came to him: if time itself were not absolute but “ owed” di erently
for observers in uniform relative motion, then all the apparent
contradictions could be resolved!
This was the key idea of Einstein’s “rough draft” on the
“electrodynamics of moving bodies which employs a modi cation of
the theory of space and time” that he spoke of in his vivacious letter
to Habicht in May 1905. Within two months this idea has been
developed into his famous paper on what became known as the
special theory of relativity. This work has received much attention
in the literature, and we will not review it here except to quote part
of one critical sentence: “The introduction of a ‘light ether’ will
prove super uous, inasmuch as … no ‘space at absolute rest’
endowed with special properties will be introduced.”
It is important to understand that the theory of special relativity
is completely independent of quantum theory and can be seen
(along with the later general theory of relativity) to be the

culmination of classical physics and its deterministic worldview.
Special relativity makes sense of classical Maxwellian
electromagnetic waves, and it does so without the somewhat
embarrassing, unobservable ether. Two months after undermining
Maxwell’s equations with his heuristic theory of light quanta, he
vindicates them from a host of experimental challenges by banishing
the ether. Talk about creative tension.
On the other hand, by getting rid of the ether, it was clear that
Einstein was now prepared to accept waves that do not travel in a
medium, “fundamental waves.” A few years later he made this
thinking explicit: “one can obtain a satisfactory theory only if one
drops the ether hypothesis. In that case the electromagnetic elds
which constitute the light will no longer appear to be states of a
hypothetical medium, but rather independent entities emitted by the
source of light.” Since EM waves were, from this point of view, a
completely new kind of entity in physics, perhaps they could be
something in between a classical particle and a classical wave, as
suggested by Einstein’s notion of light quanta. En masse they
exhibited interference like classical waves and hence could cancel
one another out, but when exchanging energy with matter they
acted like localized particles. Einstein was willing to entertain this
contradiction. He, of all the physicists of his time, was the only one
to really imagine that these two apparently con icting concepts
could be married. Over the next six years Einstein would devote the
main part of his energies to consummating this di cult marriage.

CHAPTER 11

STALKING THE PLANCK

“The three of us are ne, as always. The little sprout has
grown into quite an imposing impertinent fellow. As for my science,
I am not all that successful at present. Soon I will reach the age of
stagnation and sterility when one laments the revolutionary spirit of
the young. My papers are much appreciated and are giving rise to
further investigations. Professor Planck (Berlin) has recently written
to me about that.”
Thus the twenty-seven-year-old Einstein wrote to his former
Olympia Academy colleague Maurice Solovine in April 1906, in the
after-math of his miracle year. The “little sprout” he spoke of was
his rst son,1 Hans Albert, who had been born on May 14, 1904,
and was now coming up to his second birthday. At this point
Einstein remained virtually unknown to the wider physics
community, having personally encountered only a handful of
physicists during his studies at the Poly and in subsequent research,
none of whom were eminent theorists. He was working steadily
eight hours a day, six days a week at the patent o ce, describing
himself (with characteristic saltiness) to a friend as “a respectable
Federal ink pisser with a decent salary.” His salary had recently
grown a bit more respectable. In April of 1905 (in the midst of his
creative epiphanies) he had again submitted a dissertation for a PhD
to the University of Zurich, choosing his safest work of the moment
as the topic, that on irregular molecular movement (“Brownian
motion”) and the determination of Avogadro’s number. This time
Kleiner and the committee accepted the thesis, and as a
consequence he was promoted to technical expert second class at
the patent o ce, with a 15 percent increase in salary.

FIGURE 11.1. Albert Einstein in 1904 with his wife, Mileva Maric, and his young son,
Hans Albert. ETH-Bibliothek Zurich, Image Archive.

While Einstein personally was unknown to the great men of
theoretical physics, his work had already, barely a year later, made
a signi cant impact. As the above quotation makes clear, Planck had
already written to tell him his work was very much appreciated
(although Planck’s letter has not survived). One might have
supposed that Einstein’s work on light quanta, relating as it did to

the central achievement of Planck’s career, the blackbody radiation
law, would have been the main object of Planck’s attention and
appreciation. However this was not the case. Nothing is known of
Planck’s reaction to Einstein’s quantum hypothesis until his letter of
July 1907, quoted above, de nitively rejecting the idea of light
quanta in vacuum. In contrast, Planck immediately embraced the
special theory of relativity; he, not Einstein, gave the rst public
lecture on the subject (crediting Einstein of course) in the fall of
1905 shortly after the theory was published in September of that
year. (As the theory editor of Annalen der Physik, Planck naturally
would have seen the paper when it arrived at the end of June.)
Not only did Planck quickly publicize relativity theory, but he
also paid it the highest compliment possible from a working
scientist: he redirected his research to the study and extension of the
theory. In 1906 he published the rst major contribution to
relativity theory not due to Einstein, a proof that relativistic
mechanics was compatible with the “principle of least action,”2 an
alternative mathematical formulation of classical mechanics that
was exible enough to encompass the alterations of Newton’s laws
required by relativity theory. From 1906 to 1908 all of Planck’s new
research related to relativity theory. Because of Planck’s stature in
the eld, his immediate “lively attention” to relativity theory
endowed it with a credibility and importance that it otherwise
might not have achieved for some time. Einstein acknowledged this
in a tribute to Planck in 1913 when he stated, “It is largely due to
the determined and cordial manner in which [Planck] supported
this theory that it attracted notice so quickly among my colleagues
in the eld.”
That Planck reacted in this manner was completely consistent
with his personality and philosophy of science; he recognized that
relativity theory, as strange as it appeared to laypeople and to some
physicists, in fact completed classical mechanics and made it
compatible with Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory. Einstein himself
described it as “simply a systematic development of the
electrodynamics of Maxwell and Lorentz.” He frequently

emphasized the continuity of relativity theory with earlier physical
principles: “There is a false opinion widely spread among the
general public that the theory of relativity is to be taken as di ering
radically from the previous developments in physics…. The four
men who laid the foundations of physics on which I was able to
construct my theory are Galileo, Newton, Maxwell, and Lorentz.”
Special relativity was a theory a purist like Planck could love.
Wayward quanta of light, propagating in vacuum but still
interfering like waves, impugning the integrity of Maxwell’s
equations; now that was a completely di erent matter. The best he
could do was to forgive this impetuous genius a youthful
indiscretion.
Planck nally did address the light-quantum hypothesis in the
letter of July 1907 quoted above (“[I] assume that processes in
vacuum are described exactly by Maxwell’s equations”), but
apparently only in response to repeated prodding by Einstein, whose
own preceding letters to Planck have been lost. After stating his
belief in the validity of Maxwell’s equations, and that the “quantum
of action” (h) pertained only to the exchange of electromagnetic
energy with matter, he continued, “but more urgent than this surely
rather old question is at the moment the question of the admissibility
of your relativity principle … as long as the proponents of the
principle of relativity constitute such a modest little band as is now
the case, it is doubly important that they agree among themselves”
(italics added). Seven years after slipping discontinuity into physics
through the back door, Planck still did not see this for the epochmaking event it was. In contrast, by the end of December 1906,
Einstein had already realized that Planck’s quantum of action was
not going to remain trapped in Pandora’s radiation cavity, and that
the challenge it presented to the worldview of physicists was more
fundamental than that of relativity theory.
As mentioned above, in his 1905 paper on light quanta Einstein
had sidestepped a direct confrontation with Planck by crediting the
Planck radiation law with being “su cient to account for all
observations made so far” but basing all his conclusions on the Wien

approximation to it, which is valid for short-wavelength radiation.
His resolute insistence that the statistical mechanics of the time
could only give an impossible answer—kT of energy for each
allowed wavelength in the cavity, leading to the ultraviolet
catastrophe—indicates that at that time Einstein regarded Planck’s
“derivation” of his radiation law, employing the arti ce of the
energy element, hν, as highly suspect if not downright incorrect. By
March of 1906, almost exactly a year after publishing his
revolutionary light-quantum hypothesis, he had apparently
reconsidered this view, and submitted a paper arguing that the
Planck formula requires the concept of light quanta.
In a study published last year I showed that the Maxwell Theory
of electricity in conjunction with the theory of electrons leads to
results that contradict the evidence on black-body radiation. By a
route described in that study I was led to the view that light of
frequency ν can only be absorbed or emitted in quanta of
energy3 hν…. This relationship was developed for a range that
corresponds to the range of validity of Wien’s radiation formula.
At the time it seemed to me that in a certain respect Planck’s
theory of radiation constituted a counterpart [alternative] to my
work. New considerations, which are being reported [here],
showed me, however, that the theoretical foundation on which
Mr. Planck’s radiation theory is based di ers from the one that
would emerge from Maxwell’s theory and the theory of
electrons, precisely because Planck’s theory makes implicit use of
the aforementioned hypothesis of light quanta.
These are the opening words of the 1906 paper. Note here the
consistency with his 1905 paper, beginning rst with the statement
that conventional theory leads to a blackbody radiation law in
contradiction to Planck’s law (and for good measure he restates this
incorrect law, which led to the ultraviolet catastrophe in the second
section of the 1905 paper). Then he reiterates that his quantum
hypothesis was based only on the Wien limit and not on the full
Planck law. Finally he explicitly states that when he wrote his 1905

paper he believed that there was a tension, if not an outright
contradiction, between the Planck law and the heuristic theory of
light quanta. What had changed his mind on this?
Planck had introduced the quantization of energy for the
“molecules” (he called them resonators) in his blackbody as a
counting device, leaving it quite unclear as to whether this was a
physical hypothesis or a mathematical convenience. From this
hypothesis he derived the entropy of the resonators and then by
further manipulations determined the distribution of energy among
frequencies of radiation in the body. Now, in the 1906 paper,
Einstein starts from exactly the same equation as Planck, relating
the energy of radiation at frequency ν to the average energy of each
molecular resonator in the black body. In 1905 he had calculated
the average oscillator energy by conventional statistical mechanics
and got the answer that each one had the same energy, kT, which
when transferred to radiation and added up over an in nite number
of possible wavelengths gave in nity. Now he decides to tinker with
conventional statistical mechanics. He writes a mathematical
expression for the entropy of one of Planck’s resonators, one that he
(and independently Gibbs) had found several years earlier, which
looks di erent from Boltzmann’s famous S = k log W but which he
shows is mathematically equivalent. In his new expression, instead
of counting states, one nds the entropy by adding up contributions
from all the possible energies of each resonator.4 He nds that when
he allows the energies to take continuous values, as they do in
Newtonian physics, he gets an expression for the entropy that leads
to the ultraviolet catastrophe. But if he simply uses Planck’s
restriction, that energy can increase only in steps of hν, the Planck
law follows in a few steps of algebra. He then puts his cards on the
table:
Hence we must view the following proposition as the basis
underlying Planck’s theory of radiation: The energy of an
elementary resonator can only assume values that are integral

multiples of hν; by emission and absorption, the energy of a
resonator changes by jumps of integer multiples of hν.
This in itself is not much of a mathematical advance over Planck;
Einstein has just rearranged the mathematical route to Planck’s
formula in a way he nds more congenial and intuitive. To Einstein
this approach makes it clear that the quantization of energy is not
just a mathematical convenience but a hypothesis about nature, and
one very closely allied to his hypothesis of quanta of light. Anyone
who had read Planck’s derivation carefully might have realized the
same thing. In fact, however, we know of no other physicist of the
time who did realize this, except for the omniscient Lorentz, and as
we shall see, Lorentz ultimately drew the wrong conclusion from
this realization—that the Planck formula must be wrong. Einstein
does not even entertain the possibility that the Planck formula
might be wrong—from his earliest work on the subject he seems to
have accepted this law as an established experimental fact that must
be dealt with (a view held by a knowledgeable few in Germany, but
not more generally). Instead he attempts, as he did earlier in 1905,
to nd the law’s meaning by linking it to the quantum hypothesis,
but he is unsparingly honest about the aws in his and Planck’s
reasoning. The starting point for Planck, and for him in the current
paper, is a mathematical relationship between the energy of thermal
radiation and the average energy of matter (resonators) in contact
with that radiation, a relationship that was found on the basis of
assuming the validity of Maxwell’s equations. To then deduce the
Planck law, one inserts a quantum hypothesis that is foreign to, and
apparently contradicts, Maxwell’s theory—hardly a compelling
chain of logic.
Einstein continues: “For if the energy of a resonator can only
change in jumps, then the mean energy of a resonator in a radiation
space cannot be obtained from the usual theory of electricity,
because the latter does not recognize distinguished [quantized]
energy values of a resonator. Thus the following assumption
underlies Planck’s theory: although Maxwell’s theory is not
applicable to elementary resonators, nevertheless the mean energy

of an elementary resonator … is equal to the energy calculated by
Maxwell’s theory.” In other words, Planck uses Maxwell when it
suits his purposes and doesn’t use him when it doesn’t. But Einstein
is not pointing a nger at Planck; instead he is pointing out the need
for a fundamental revision of physics to encompass quanta. “In my
opinion the above considerations do not at all disprove Planck’s
theory of radiation; rather, they seem to me to show that with his
theory of radiation Mr. Planck introduced into physics a new
hypothetical element: the hypothesis of light quanta.”
Herr Planck, however, declined to take credit for this outlandish
new hypothesis, by all indications immediately upon learning of it,
and for certain in his letter of July 1907, when he urged Einstein to
focus on the very important issues of relativity theory and to put the
potentially lethal case of the contradictory quanta in quarantine.
Einstein did not take his advice; on the contrary, he was soon to
spread the infection from radiation to matter. But while Einstein
was plotting his next radical step, the great men of the eld were
just waking up to the dangerous paradox of thermal radiation within
classical physics, the ultraviolet catastrophe. The eminent British
physicist Lord Rayleigh had peeked at it six years earlier but had
then averted his eyes; now it was becoming impossible to ignore.
1

Hans Albert was Einstein’s second child; his rst, a daugher named Lieserl, was born to
Mileva in Novi Sad, Serbia, in 1902, before their marriage. The child was left in Serbia
with friends or relatives under unclear circumstances, and her subsequent history is
unknown, although it is believed that she did not survive to adulthood.
2

The mathematical quantity called “action” mentioned here is the same one that led
Planck to call his constant, h, the “quantum of action” because it has the same physical
“units” of mass times velocity times distance. In classical physics action is not quantized,
and Planck did not invoke the constant h in his work on relativity theory.
3

Einstein did not actually use the symbol h introduced by Planck for his constant,
preferring instead to use a ratio of older constants equal to Planck’s constant. Einstein
continued this practice for several more years, perhaps indicating a reluctance to accept h
as a fundamental constant of nature.
4

The method, very common in modern treatments, is to relate the entropy to the “free
energy,” which itself is obtained from the “partition function,” a sum over functions of the
energy of the system.

CHAPTER 12

CALAMITY JEANS

In June of 1900, six months prior to Planck’s historic act
of desperation and long before Einstein’s 1906 clari cation of its
meaning, John William Strutt, Lord and Third Baron Rayleigh, had
noticed that something must be wrong with the Wien law. This was
the law that was believed to describe blackbody radiation but would
soon be found experimentally to fail at long wavelengths.
Lord Rayleigh, a member of the British nobility, had overcome
his family’s disapproval of the plebeian study of nature to ascend to
the very pinnacle of British science. He had been a sickly youth,
bouncing from school to school, and thus did not exhibit his talents
early, even being turned down for a minor scholarship at
Cambridge. Unexpectedly, he had blossomed at Cambridge, winning
the top mathematics award (“First Wrangler”) in 1865 under the
exacting supervision of the formidable mathematics teacher E. J.
Routh.1 Upon graduation he ignored his father’s reservations about
a peer joining academia and won a fellowship at Trinity College,
Cambridge. In 1871 his theory of the scattering of light waves by
pointlike particles provided the rst rigorous explanation of the blue
color of the sky, and in 1877 he published his masterpiece: The
Theory of Sound. By 1879 his reputation as a physicist was so great
that he was chosen to succeed Maxwell as the head of the Cavendish
Laboratory at Cambridge. After great success in this role he resigned
in 1884 to concentrate again on his own research, which spanned
not only acoustics and electromagnetism but also arcana such as the
“soaring of birds” and the “irregular ight of tennis balls.” At that
time he expressed his vocation thus:

the domain of natural sciences is surely broad enough to satisfy
the wildest ambition of its devotees…. Increasing knowledge
brings with it increasing power, and great as are the triumphs of
the present century, we may well believe that they are but a
foretaste of what discovery and invention have yet in store for
mankind…. The work may be hard, and the discipline severe;
but the interest never fails, and great is the privilege of
achievement.
By 1900, when he enters our story, he had in the previous year
received the Copley Medal of the Royal Society, the same high
honor it would award to J. W. Gibbs in the following year, and was
four years from becoming the fourth recipient of the Nobel Prize in
Physics.2 The great generation of Maxwell, Stokes, and Thomson
(Lord Kelvin) having relinquished the stage, Rayleigh was now the
voice of British physics.
Rayleigh had been following the investigations of blackbody
radiation in Germany and was aware that the Wien law was
currently favored both on the basis of experiments and from
extensions of the theory (Planck’s extensions, in fact, before his
famous retraction in October 1900). But he was unimpressed with
the theory leading to the Wien law, dismissing it as “little more than
a conjecture.” In fact he had noticed that the mathematical formula
expressing this law had an odd feature. Both the incorrect Wien law
and the correct Planck law have the feature that at a given
temperature there is a particular frequency of radiation that carries
the largest fraction of the radiated energy; that is, both
mathematical functions have a “peak” at a frequency that depends
on the temperature of the body.3 This peak frequency increases with
increasing temperature, residing in the infrared at normal
temperature but moving into the visible when matter is heated to
six thousand degrees kelvin, as at the surface of the sun. Rayleigh
was interested in how the peak frequency shifts upward when the
temperature is increased. This could happen in two ways, either by
the radiation energy increasing only at higher frequencies than the

previous peak, or by the energy increasing more at the higher than
at the lower frequencies, so that while the entire curve of energy
output moves upward, its peak also shifts to higher frequency.
Rayleigh’s intuition was that a rising tide lifts all boats; that is,
increasing the temperature of the body should increase the radiation
energy output at all frequencies, so he thought the second option
had to be the correct one. But he noticed that this was not the way
the Wien law worked. The Wien law predicts that if one heats an
object and measures the low-frequency side of the curve (below the
peak), the energy at these frequencies will stop increasing once the
temperature is high enough. Rayleigh was sure that this had to be
wrong (and he was right; the correct, Planck law does not have this
property).
Rayleigh was very familiar with the fact that the thermodynamic
energy of a particle in a gas is simply proportional to its
temperature. This fact is closely related to the equation Emol = kT
(where k is Boltzmann’s constant) for a simple vibrating molecule,
emphasized by Einstein in both his 1905 and 1906 papers on quanta
of light. As already mentioned, the classical prediction that all
vibrating structures at the same temperature should have the same
thermal energy, kT, is known as the equipartition theorem. The term
“theorem” is a bit of a misnomer, since the soon-to-emerge quantum
theory would disprove this statement, as least in the case of
molecular vibrations. But at the time Rayleigh was rst studying
blackbody radiation, there was not yet even a hint of such drastic
measures, so he was willing to rely on the standard classical
statistical mechanics. He realized that the equipartition result, Emol
= kT, for vibrating structures of di erent frequency was just one
example of the equal sharing of thermal energy. For a gas of freely
moving particles, again each particle should have the same amount
of thermal energy, but in this case the amount is di erent than for
an oscillator at the same temperature:4 Egas = 3kT/2.

As suggested by its name, classical statistical mechanics leads to
the conclusion that all the thermal energy in the environment is
equally shared among similar types of atomic motion. Rayleigh

referred to this as “Maxwell’s doctrine of partition of energy,” and
he had validated it in detail, using Newtonian mechanics, in a long
paper written only a few months earlier in 1900. Such perfect
energy sharing would be correct if molecules were made up of little
Newtonian billiard balls, but it turns out that this isn’t the world we
live in, and equipartition doesn’t hold in our quantum world.
This is a good thing. Like many egalitarian principles,
equipartition can have unanticipated consequences. In this case the
consequence would have been the ultraviolet catastrophe pointed
out and rejected by Einstein in his paper on light quanta ve years
later. Unknown to Einstein, Rayleigh had been there rst, but he
didn’t raise the alarm.
As Rayleigh pondered the Wien law in June of 1900, he drew on
his great expertise in acoustics, which told him that the classical
equipartition principle didn’t really describe well the actual
behavior of gases. The speed of sound in a gas (or mixture of gases
like the atmosphere) depends on how its energy content changes
with temperature, which is termed the “speci c heat” of the gas.
The properties of the speci c heat of many gases did not agree with
the equipartition concept; many gases had smaller speci c heats
than they should, if one just counted how many types of vibrations
they were expected to have and assigned to each its equal share of
energy. Rayleigh, noting this, opined, “what would appear to be
wanted is some escape from the destructive simplicity [of the
equipartition theorem].” The Great Escape, quantization of energy,
would be found by Herr Planck in less than a year, but Rayleigh had
no way of knowing this. He did know that equipartition was not
working in general, and so he was reluctant to trust it in considering
the blackbody law, which he charmingly termed, in his new paper
of June 1900, the “law of complete radiation.” Nonetheless he
realized that this equipartition principle could x the odd feature of
the Wien law he had noticed.
While admitting that “the question is one to be settled by
experiment … in the meantime,” Rayleigh wrote, “I venture to
suggest a modi cation [of the Wien law] which appears to me more

probable a priori.” First he assumed that the radiation in the
blackbody cavity could be thought of as the vibrations of an elastic
medium, much like sound waves, essentially assuming a mechanical
ether to support radiation (as did all the other physicists of his
time). He termed each of these elastic vibrations, with di erent
frequencies, “radiation modes.” He then used equipartition to nd
the energy of those vibrations, but only for the low-frequency
modes: “although for some reason not yet explained [the ‘MaxwellBoltzmann doctrine of the partition of energy’] fails in general, it
seems possible that it may apply to the graver [lower-frequency]
modes.”
With this assumption he derives essentially the same expression
for the classical blackbody law that Einstein nds in section 1 of his
1905 paper, except … he fudges it. Seeing that this would lead to an
absurd result, in nite energy when summed over all wavelengths,
he doesn’t write Einstein’s (correct) answer but, instead, adds an
additional, completely unjusti ed factor to the equation that “turns
o ” the high-frequency modes and avoids the ultraviolet
catastrophe. Moreover, in 1900 he does not grace his readers with
any explanation for this fudge factor, which is simply introduced in
the nal answer.
Perhaps he felt that given his earlier statement about only using
equipartition for lower frequencies, readers weren’t going to take his
answer seriously at high frequencies anyway. Perhaps this was his
best guess about how the true law behaved at high frequencies; we
will never know.5 We do know that Rayleigh’s law, with the fudge
factor, was taken seriously by the German experimenters Rubens
and Kurlbaum, because they compared it to their data just a few
months later. They found that while Planck’s newly minted
radiation law t the data at all frequencies, Rayleigh’s did so only at
low frequencies, where both laws were the essentially the same.6
Note the di erent conclusions drawn by the callow patent o cer
Einstein and the decorated Lord Rayleigh. Einstein, through his own
deep meditations on classical statistical physics, had come to the
conclusion that the equipartition theorem was the only possible

answer this theory could give; thus the failure of equipartition to
apply to the higher frequencies of blackbody radiation meant that
there needed to be a fundamentally new theory of atoms or
electromagnetism, or both. Rayleigh knew that equipartition failed
but hesitated to ascribe this to a failure of classical physics. In this
he was similar to Planck, who was forced to accept at least the new
quantum of action, h, but couldn’t accept its radical implications.
But this was not the end of the story. A much younger
Cambridge physicist, James Hopwood Jeans, had just completed his
studies (graduating as Second Wrangler) and took up a research
position, devoting himself to the theoretical study of gases. Jeans
was a more amboyant personality than Rayleigh, later specializing
in astrophysics and cosmology and introducing the steady-state
model of the universe, which was invalidated by the big bang
theory.7 It was precisely to blackbody radiation that Jeans turned in
1904 when he published his treatise The Dynamical Theory of Gases.
In this work he expressed a more de nitive view of the situation
than Rayleigh, leading to a shocking conclusion: the equipartition
theorem is valid for all frequencies, and the ultraviolet catastrophe
is happening. “If an interaction between aether and matter exists, no
matter how small this interaction may be … we are led to the
conclusion that no steady state is possible until all of the energy of
the gas has been dissipated by radiation into the aether.”
So why wasn’t the entire earth cooled down to absolute zero as
the in nity of radiation modes sucked all energy from matter? Easy.
It’s all happening very, very slowly.
We can now trace the course of events when one or more masses
of gas are left to themselves in the undisturbed aether [i.e., in
contact with radiation] … a transfer of energy is taking place
between the principal degrees of freedom of the molecules and
the vibrations of low frequency in the aether. This … endows the
aether with a small amount of energy…. After this a third
transfer of energy begins to show itself, but the time required for

this must be measured in millions and billions of years unless the
gas is very hot.
In the technical language of thermodynamics, Jeans was dropping
the assumption that matter is “in equilibrium” with radiation—the
idea that radiation and matter have interacted long enough to nd
the most probable distribution of energy and that if one waited a
long time, and measured blackbody radiation over and over again,
the energy distribution would not change.
In 1905, at just about the same time that Einstein was writing his
paper on quanta, Jeans and Rayleigh argued this question in a series
of letters to the journal Nature. At this point Rayleigh, dropping his
unjusti ed fudge factor, published what became known as the
Rayleigh-Jeans law8 in 1905: ρ(υ) = (8πυ2/c3)kT. As before, ρ(υ) is
the mathematical function expressing the radiation law—Rayleigh’s
classical version of the Planck law. What does it say? Well rst it
says that energy density of radiation at frequency υ is proportional
to kT. Since the equipartition theorem says that each radiation mode
must have kT of energy, the factor in front, (8πυ2/c3), must
represent the number of such modes per unit volume (hence their
density). But note that this factor has a crazy feature, the one that
Einstein noticed: it is proportional to the square of the frequency,
implying that more and more energy is held by radiation of higher
and higher frequencies. In fact the proposed law is identical to the
one that Einstein wrote down and immediately rejected in his 1905
paper on light quanta, because if matter were in equilibrium with
radiation the law leads to the ultraviolet catastrophe. This
catastrophe is only being postponed temporarily, in the view of
Jeans; the entire material universe is ghting a losing battle against
radiation. The only reason we haven’t all frozen to death is that we
are losing the battle at an imperceptible pace.
You don’t get away with this kind of maneuver scot-free. Things
are interconnected in physics; in thermodynamics we almost always
assume that nature is in thermal equilibrium in order to explain
how things work. If you assume blackbody radiation is not in

equilibrium, how, for example, do you explain the well-veri ed
Stefan-Boltzmann law for the total energy radiated by a blackbody,
which requires thermal equilibrium? A lucky accident?
Moreover the detailed agreement of the Planck formula with
measurement would also have to be a lucky accident. And if you
think hard, the coincidences required by the Jeans hypothesis
multiply rapidly.9 Planck, steeped in detailed experimental data,
hardly took the Jeans idea seriously when he mentioned it in his
textbook on thermodynamics in 1906. Privately he was even more
scathing, commenting about Jeans in a letter to Wien, “he is the
model of the theorist as he should not be, just as Hegel was in
philosophy; so much the worse for the facts if they don’t t.”
Nonetheless, the Jeans “slow catastrophe” model remained under
serious discussion for the remainder of the decade.
A puzzle always looks simpler after you know the answer. It hard
for us now to believe that many outstanding scientists could accept
such a imsy explanation. But, from the perspective of physicists at
the time, was a radical failure of Newtonian mechanics at the
atomic level really a more attractive option than dropping the
assumption of thermal equilibrium? Somehow Einstein intuited that
it was. And he set out to substantiate his view shortly after his
acceptance of the Planck law in 1906. He did this by looking at the
very same physical property that had troubled Maxwell and
Rayleigh, and had led Jeans to embrace his radical alternative to the
Planck law. He reexamined the speci c heat of matter, but not in
the gaseous state; in the solid state instead. Ultimately this work
would sweep away any hope that atoms might obey classical
mechanics.
1

Routh was known to be so sparing in his praise that when another First Wrangler, Lord
Fletcher Moulton, produced an almost unheard-of perfect exercise, the only comment on
the paper from Routh was “Fold neatly.”
2
3

He was recognized for his discovery of the element argon in the atmosphere.
See appendix 2 for a graph showing the three radiation laws as a function of frequency.

4

For a gas particle moving in a single dimension, Egas = kT/2, half that of the oscillator.
This is because the gas particle has only kinetic energy and no potential energy, which for
the oscillator gives an equal contribution, Emol = kT/2 + kT/= kT. However, for the
realistic case of a gas particle moving in all three directions in space, Egas = kT/2 + kT/2
+ kT/2 = 3kT/2.
5

When Rayleigh published his law with a more detailed and careful discussion in 1905, he
clearly pointed out that if equipartition held for all frequencies, one would get an in nite
blackbody radiation energy, which is absurd and implies some type of failure of the
equipartition principle.
6

Editing his paper for a collection in 1902, Rayleigh added a footnote claiming that in
1900 he really meant his law to apply only to the low-frequency behavior anyway, and
thus took the experiments of Rubens and Kurlbaum as vindicating his guess. The fudge
factor was not mentioned. He was by then aware of Planck’s correct guess and stated it.
7

Ironically, the big bang theory was itself de nitively validated by the observation of the
blackbody radiation it produced.
8

Rayleigh published this formula with a trivial error: he neglected to include both
polarizations of light, which gave too small a result by a factor of eight. Jeans corrected the
error, and the law is now universally named after the pair. Einstein derived the same law
independently in 1905, publishing it about a month earlier than Rayleigh, but his name is
never associated with the law. Until Rayleigh’s initial error was found, his formula did not
agree with the low-frequency limit of Planck’s law. Rayleigh noted that a comparison of
the approaches would be helpful, but “not having succeeded in following Planck’s
reasoning, he declared himself “unable to undertake it.” Once the error was corrected, the
two laws agreed perfectly at low frequencies.
9

Rayleigh, to his credit, never fully endorsed Jeans’s slow catastrophe theory. Saying
merely that for short wavelengths “there must be some limitation on the principle of
equipartition.” This limitation was provided by Planck and Einstein, but Rayleigh was not
convinced, writing in 1911: “Since the date of these [1905] letters further valuable work
has been done by Planck, Jeans, Lorentz, … Einstein and others. But I suppose the question
can hardly be considered settled.”

CHAPTER 13

FROZEN VIBRATIONS

The whole thing started with a kind of interpolation formula by
Planck. Nobody wanted to accept it because it did not appear
logical … half the argument was continuous and the other half
was based … on quanta of energy. The only man who appeared
sensible was Einstein. He had the feeling that if there was
anything to Planck’s idea it must appear in other parts of physics.
—NOBEL LAUREATE PETER DEBYE, 1964
Einstein’s nemesis in his student days, Professor Heinrich
Weber, may have come close to depriving posterity of Einstein’s
historic genius, but now Herr Weber would indirectly play a crucial
role in the owering of that genius. In 1875 the young Weber, then
an assistant to Helmholtz in Berlin, had just completed the best
experiments extant on the speci c heat of solids. The e ect he was
studying was an apparent violation of the empirical law noted by
Pierre Dulong and Alex Petit fty-six years earlier in 1819. These
French researchers had discovered that pretty much every solid they
measured had the same speci c heat, once one took into account the
di erence of the atomic weight of the constituents. For example, a
copper atom’s weight is about 60 percent that of a silver atom, so
0.6 grams of copper and one gram of silver have the same number
of atoms, and would then also be found to have the same speci c
heat. Even at that early date Dulong and Petit interpreted their
nding in terms of the properties of underlying atoms, stating boldly
that “one is allowed to infer … the following law: the atoms of all
simple [elements] have exactly the same heat capacity.” Later they

would restrict this optimistic assessment to atoms in solids; as
already noted, gases were behaving in a strange manner, which
would puzzle Maxwell, Rayleigh, and others for another eightyseven years.
What exactly is speci c heat, and why did it suggest something
about atoms? Speci c heat is a number that characterizes a chunk of
stu (solid, liquid, gas); it is the amount the thermal energy in a
gram of that stu changes when you change its temperature by one
degree centigrade.1 Thus it measures how thermal energy varies
with temperature. We have already learned that if one trusts
Newtonian mechanics on the atomic scale, and the laws of statistics,
then the energy of each vibrating structure bears the simplest
possible relation to temperature, Emol = kT; for atoms in a solid
there are three independent directions of vibration, so according to
the equipartition relation one gets 3kT of energy per atom.2 If this
relation holds, then if you change the temperature by one degree,
the energy per atom changes by exactly 3k, independent of the type
of atom involved. This is exactly the law found by Dulong and Petit.
But by 1906 Einstein had seen the red ag waving here; this
argument relies completely on the equipartition principle, precisely
the notion that he realized had failed for blackbody radiation. Thus
the speci c heat of solids would provide his next opportunity to
extend quantum concepts, bolstered by the experimental work of his
erstwhile opponent.
It is unlikely that the young Heinrich Weber would even have
known the statistical theory underpinning the Dulong and Petit law
when, between 1872 and 1875, he decided to test it carefully.
However, earlier measurements on solids had hinted that the
relation was not quite as trustworthy as its discoverers had
originally thought. One elemental solid was a particularly “bad
actor,” one that had required “di culty and expense” to study:
diamond. Diamond, the hardest of the elemental solids, refused to
give up its full quota of energy when its temperature was lowered
one degree, registering a speci c heat less than 30 percent of the
expected Dulong-Petit value. Not only was diamond miserly with its

heat energy; the measured values of its speci c heat reported by
various experimenters did not even agree. That is where Weber
came in.
Weber, the eventual staid professor, in his youth was not averse
to bold hypotheses, and so he made one: the speci c heat of solids is
not constant at all but can vary widely as the overall temperature is
varied. This conjecture was in complete disagreement with the
equipartition principle, of course, but given his distrust of theory,
this would not likely have swayed Weber even had he known of it.
With this hypothesis the di erent values of diamond’s speci c heat
could be reconciled, as they corresponded to measurements made at
rather di erent starting temperatures. Weber suspected that
somehow the Dulong-Petit value of 3k per atom was only reached at
high enough temperatures, and for some reason, in the case of
diamond, room temperature wasn’t high enough. He thought that if
he could cool diamond samples well below room temperature, he
would nd even larger deviations from that value. His work
predated all the breakthroughs in cryogenics that now make it
possible routinely to lower the temperature of a solid to hundredths
of a degree above absolute zero (−273°C). Poor Weber had to rely
on natural ice to do his measurements at low temperature, and
needed to suspend them in March of 1872 due to the lack of
available snow!
By 1875 Weber had pushed his experimental technology to a
higher level and was able to present beautiful measurements of the
speci c heat of diamond, varying the temperature from −100°C to
+1,000°C. Sure enough, at the highest temperatures the speci c
heat of diamond increased until it attained the Dulong-Petit (DP)
value and then stopped increasing, whereas as the temperature was
lowered below normal room temperature it continued to decrease
down to one- fteenth of the DP value. Moreover other elemental
solids showed a similar but less dramatic variation with
temperature. Weber’s basic hypothesis was right. For some reason,
for most materials, room temperature is hot enough that the DP law
initially appeared universal; but for diamond and a few others it is

not. And most puzzling of all, at very low temperatures diamond
and other materials appeared to lose completely the ability to emit
or absorb heat energy when the temperature was changed; their
speci c heat seemed to disappear. Walther Nernst, who studied with
Weber prior to becoming the preeminent physical chemist of his
generation, described the situation thus: “through the diamond
experiment one has therefore found that the atomic vibrations can
be brought to a standstill. As soon as this happens, the concept of
heat does not any longer exist for the ‘dead body.’ ” Weber had
made a great experimental discovery, the greatest of his career;
eventually it landed him a full professorship at the Poly, leading to
his fateful encounters with Einstein.
Recall that Einstein lauded Weber’s course on heat during their
brief honeymoon period. Einstein’s course notes from that time have
actually survived, but they contain no evidence that Weber
discussed his own discovery, the strong temperature variation of
speci c heat. Nonetheless we have already noted that by 1901
Einstein, in a letter to Mileva, announced that he had been
considering “the latent [speci c] heat of solids” in connection with
Planck’s radiation formula, and that his views on latent heat had
changed because his views on radiation theory had “sunk back into
the sea of haziness.” Thus it is safe to assume he was by then aware
of Weber’s systematic demonstration of anomalous behavior. Now,
in early 1906, Einstein’s views on radiation were no longer hazy:
Planck’s formula was right, equipartition was wrong, and
Newtonian mechanics was in jeopardy. It was time to see if the
heretical ideas relating to quanta could clean up the speci c heat
anomalies just as they had explained the odd behavior of the
photoelectric e ect. By November of 1906, eight months after his
paper announcing that the Planck formula required light quanta,
Einstein submitted his second great work on quantum theory to
Annalen Der Physik, titled “Planck’s Theory of Radiation and the
Theory of Speci c Heat.”
Einstein’s papers in general have a more philosophical tone than
typical physics papers, even those of the time. And so after an

introductory review of his 1905 and 1906 papers on light quanta, he
presents the following ontological dictum to the (in all likelihood
dumbfounded) reader:
For although one has thought before that the motion of
molecules obeys the same laws that hold for the motion of
bodies in our world of sense perception … we must now assume
… that the diversity of states that they can assume is less than
for bodies within our experience. For we make the additional
assumption that the mechanism of energy transfer is such that
the energy of elementary structures can only assume the values
0, hυ, 2hυ, etc.
This is the statement of quantization of energy at the atomic scale,
as clear and unequivocal as one would nd in a modern physics
textbook. Einstein, not Planck, said it rst. Discontinuity is not a
mathematical trick; it is the way of the atomic world. Get used to it.
Einstein continues:
I believe we must not content ourselves with this result. For the
question arises: If the elementary structures … cannot be
perceived in terms of the current molecular-kinetic theory [of
heat], are we then not obliged also to modify the theory for
other periodically oscillating structures considered in the
molecular theory of heat? In my opinion the answer is not in
doubt. If Planck’s radiation theory goes to the root of the matter,
then contradictions between the current molecular-kinetic theory
and experience must be expected in other areas of the theory of
heat as well, which can be resolved along the lines indicated. In
my opinion this is actually the case, as I now shall attempt to
show.
The argument from here is remarkably straightforward. Atoms
form a solid when they arrange themselves in a regular pattern in
space, held together by electrostatic interactions. Einstein states that
the simplest picture one may have of heat energy stored in a solid is

that all the atoms “perform [periodic] oscillations around their
equilibrium positions.” As already noted, for a mass oscillating
periodically back and forth in each of three directions the
equipartition principle predicts 3kT of energy per atom, yielding the
DP value for the speci c heat. But, Einstein notes, several elements
(diamond, boron, silicon) have smaller speci c heat than expected
from this law, and compounds containing oxygen and hydrogen also
show similar violations. Finally, he notes that Drude identi ed other
kinds of oscillations in solids, involving the electrons, which appear
to be important in how solids absorb light but don’t seem to
contribute to the speci c heat. But the equipartition principle
requires that all oscillations get their share of energy, so these
“extra” oscillations should cause the speci c heat of solids to
actually exceed the DP value, which was not observed. So
something is out of kilter.
The atoms in a solid were really no di erent from the
“elementary resonators” in Planck’s blackbody radiation theory
(which were held in place by electric forces but could vibrate in all
three directions around their equilibrium values), and Einstein had
already announced in his 1906 paper that such vibrating structures
can only have energies equal to an integer times their frequencies, E
= 0, hυ, 2hυ, etcetera. Thus each atomic vibration has a ladder of
allowed energies separated by hυ. But the typical amount of energy
available to each atom from its thermal environment is just the
equipartition value, kT (per direction of vibration). So what happens
if the quantized energy of the atomic vibration, hυ, is much larger
than kT? The atom then is like a man trying to climb a ladder whose
rungs are much farther apart than his reach. It can never get o the
lowest “rung”; its vibrational energy remains stuck at zero.
Thus some modes of vibration are “frozen out”; their rst
nonzero quantized energy level is too high to absorb the amount of
energy dictated by the Dulong-Petit (equipartition) law. Moreover,
it makes sense that these “missing vibrations” would disappear rst
in materials that are very hard, like diamond. Roughly speaking, a
material is harder if its atomic constituents are more tightly bound

in place, so that they vibrate very rapidly when disturbed from
equilibrium. But if they vibrate very rapidly, then their frequency is
unusually high, so that the energy-level spacing of that material, hυ,
is unusually large. Thus, when compared over the same range of
(decreasing) temperature, their vibrations freeze into the lowest
level before those of a softer solid. This paucity of high-frequency
atomic vibrations is of course conceptually linked to the “missing”
high-frequency modes of thermal radiation that characterizes the
Planck law and that so puzzled Rayleigh. Einstein had now realized
that quantum freezing of vibrations is also the ultimate explanation
for the strange behavior of the speci c heat of solids.
However, to actually get a precise formula for the quantum
speci c heat of a solid that he could compare to data, Einstein
decided to make a simpli ed model of a vibrating solid. Any system
in mechanical equilibrium will oscillate back and forth when it is
given a little energy; think of a pendulum pushed a bit to the side
from the vertical. But the frequency of the oscillations depends on
the details of the system, and for a solid made up of an enormous
number of atoms there are many di erent types of oscillatory
motions with many di erent frequencies, depending, for example,
on the chemical bonding arrangements of the constituent atoms.
This set of di erent frequencies was too complicated to work out at
the time (modern quantum physicists can do it with incredible
precision), so to compare his theory’s prediction to the
measurements for diamond, Einstein assumes that it has only a
single, primary frequency of vibration. He is quick to point out that,
given this simpli cation, “of course an exact agreement with the
facts is out of the question.”
Nonetheless, this assumption gives him an approximate law for
the temperature variation of speci c heat based directly on Planck’s
expression for the energy of a single oscillator of frequency υ; and
this expression shows remarkably good agreement with Weber’s
data. He remarks, “both above-mentioned di culties3 are resolved
by the new interpretation and I believe it likely that the latter will
prove its validity in principle.” In fact, according to Einstein’s new

theory, the speci c heat of all solids decreases with decreasing
temperature until, at the absolute zero of temperature, it completely
disappears—a stunning prediction.
But there was one further radical step to take. Throughout this
paper Einstein assumes that the same molecular vibrations that store
heat also exchange energy with radiation through emission and
absorption, thus closely tying the speci c heat formula to the
blackbody law. But after submitting his paper he recalled that there
are molecular vibrations that do not interact with radiation at all,
and that such vibrations can still store heat and contribute to the
speci c heat.4 Einstein realized that this was an important
observation and actually published a note of correction, stating,
“most certainly there could exist uncharged heat carriers
[vibrations], i.e. such ones that are not observable optically.” But if
neutral vibrations, those that do not interact with radiation, were
also subject to the law of quantization of energy, then whatever the
quantum theory was, its domain was not merely the interaction of
radiation with matter, as Planck had hoped. The disease of
discontinuity was present in matter without radiation; Newtonian
atoms had frozen to death.

FIGURE 13.1. Graph from Albert Einstein’s 1907 paper which predicts that the speci c
heat of all solids should go to zero as the temperature is lowered, due to quantization of
vibrational energy. Here the theory (dashed line) is being compared to Weber’s data for the
temperature variation of the speci c heat of diamond. Courtesy the Albert Einstein
Archive.

1

Thermal energy and temperature are distinct concepts in thermodynamics. Suppose I heat
a glass of water and a bathtub full of water with a blowtorch for ten seconds. Each receives
the same amount of thermal energy but the change in their temperature is very di erent.
2

This factor of 3 is the same one that gives us 3kT/2 for atoms in a gas, coming from the
fact that the atom can move in all three spatial dimensions.
3

The disappearance of speci c heat at low temperature, and the absence of “extra” speci c
heat due to optical-frequency electronic vibrations.
4

These are vibrations that do not generate a net dipole moment.

CHAPTER 14

PLANCK’S NOBEL
NIGHTMARE
The two constants [h, k] … which occur in the equation for
radiative entropy o er the possibility of establishing a system of
units for length, mass, time and temperature which are
independent of speci c bodies or materials and which necessarily
maintain their meaning for all time and for all civilizations, even
those which are extraterrestrial and non-human.
—MAX PLANCK
It was the fall of 1908, and Svante Augustus Arrhenius
was determined to see that Max Planck received the Nobel Prize for
Physics that year. Arrhenius, a scientist of impressively broad and
bold speculations, had recently returned from a tour of Europe,
where he was received warmly as be tted the rst Swedish winner
of the newly minted Nobel prizes. Arrhenius had won the Chemistry
Prize in 1903 (two years after the establishment of the awards) for
his groundbreaking work on electrolytic chemistry. He was widely
recognized as a founder of the discipline of physical chemistry,
which works at the boundary of the elds of physics and chemistry.
In 1905 he had been o ered a professorship in Berlin but had
turned it down to remain in Sweden and head the new Nobel
Institute for Physical Research; after receiving the prize he would be
a member of the Nobel Award Committee in Physics and a de facto
member of the Chemistry Committee for the remainder of his life.
As such he had enormous in uence over who received these awards,
and he did not hesitate to use that in uence.

Arrhenius, like all his contemporaries, was blissfully unaware of
the looming crisis in atomic physics, uncovered by the work of the
young Einstein, who was now becoming known—not for challenging
the Newtonian paradigm of continuous motion but instead for
dismissing another Newtonian axiom, the concept of absolute time.
While Einstein had quickly moved to the terra incognita of the
nascent quantum theory, assuming that atoms existed and trying to
gure out their laws of motion and their interactions with radiation,
Arrhenius was still ghting the last war, the war to prove that atoms
were real. The ensuing episode illustrated just how oblivious the
scienti c community was to the gathering storm.
Had Arrhenius known the story of the checkered career of the
German/Swiss Jew, who was still not recognized formally by the
conservative professoriate of Switzerland in 1908, he likely would
have recognized a kindred spirit. Arrhenius grew up near Uppsala,
Sweden, where his father was a surveyor for the University of
Uppsala, the oldest and among the most prestigious of the Nordic
universities. A science and math prodigy, he had matriculated at the
university at age seventeen, and received his degree in two years,
before moving on to graduate studies in physics. However, in a
striking parallel to Einstein, he alienated the senior members of the
faculty, Tobias Thalen (physics) and Per Theodor Cleve (chemistry),
and left after three years to complete his doctorate at the new
Physical Institute of the Academy of Sciences in Stockholm.
Unfortunately for Arrhenius the new institute was not yet allowed to
grant PhDs on its own. Thus when, in 1884, he produced a
monumental 150-page work on the conductivity of electrolytic
solutions, explaining, for example, the high conductivity of salt in
water by its dissociation into ions, it was received with great
skepticism by a committee consisting mainly of faculty whom he
had spurned at Uppsala. In the end the thesis was approved with the
lowest possible passing grade, non sine laude approbatur, (“accepted,
not without praise”). Forty years later Arrhenius would recount
bitterly that Cleve and Thalen even refused to o er him the
customary congratulations after the doctoral ceremony, saying that

they had decided to “sacri ce him.” Although this work and its
extensions would eventually earn him the Nobel Prize, the grade it
had received was so poor that he was at least nominally disquali ed
from pursuing an academic career in Sweden at the time.
Here, however, his story diverges from that of Einstein, for he
boldly sent the devalued thesis to the leading lights of European
chemistry and physics, Clausius (inventor of the concept of
entropy), van ‘t Ho in Amsterdam (who would be the rst Nobel
Laureate in Chemistry), and Ostwald in Riga (the ninth Nobel
chemistry laureate). One of these men, Ostwald, immediately
recognized its innovativeness, to the extent that he even traveled
personally to Uppsala to o er Arrhenius a job at his own
institution.1 Arrhenius did not cut a particularly impressive gure,
according to Ostwald: “[Arrhenius] is somewhat corpulent with a
red face and a short mustache, short hair; he reminds me more of a
student of agriculture than a theoretical chemist with unusual
ideas.” But a brilliant chemist he was, and eventually Arrhenius did
move to Europe and trained with Ostwald, van ‘t Ho , and even
with Boltzmann before returning to Sweden to become the
unquestioned leader of Swedish physical chemistry, and the person
who de ned the international scope of the Nobel prizes at their
inception.
A decade later, at the turn of the century, there was still a major
movement in chemistry and physics that regarded atoms as
somewhat suspect heuristic entities, a movement led by Arrhenius’s
former mentor, Wilhelm Ostwald. This school of thought was known
as “energetics” and also had adherents in the Swedish physics
community, which maintained an attitude of distrust toward theory
in general and of “pronounced hostility toward atomism and toward
atomic theory” in particular. Arrhenius had decided to put this
movement to nal rest and make 1908 the Nobel Year of the Atom.
Max Planck would receive the physics prize for the manner in which
his radiation law had led to an accurate determination of
Avogadro’s number and the elementary unit of atomic charge, e.
The chemistry prize would be awarded to the British physicist

Ernest Rutherford, who had shown that atoms disintegrated (i.e.,
emitted doubly ionized helium atoms, known as alpha particles)
during radioactive decay. In a very recent experiment with Geiger,
Rutherford had deduced a value of the elementary charge from
alpha particles in excellent agreement with that calculated by
Planck using his radiation law, tying the two prizes neatly together.
The fact that Rutherford considered himself a physicist and
would be very surprised to know that he had been reclassi ed a
chemist2 did not deter Arrhenius from his plan. Arrhenius had
nominated Rutherford for both the physics and chemistry prizes that
year, but it is likely that he had planned all along to support Planck
in the Physics Committee, of which he was a member. By the time
of the crucial meeting on September 18, 1908, he knew that the
Chemistry Committee (based on an internal report he had
apparently ghostwritten) was committed to awarding the prize to
Rutherford. Planck and Wien had been jointly nominated in physics
for the theory of heat radiation by Ivar Fredholm, a Swedish
mathematician and mathematical physicist, and Arrhenius swung
his support to this nomination, but with the intention of splitting the
ticket and engineering a prize for Planck alone.
Why did Arrhenius think that Planck alone should be
recognized? Because at that time Arrhenius was not interested in the
physical principles behind the law of thermal radiation3 so much as
in its connection to the fundamental constants in molecular
chemistry. This is an aspect of Planck’s work of 1900 that is barely
mentioned in modern times, but at that time it overshadowed his
radical quantum hypothesis. Planck’s radiation law depended on the
two newly discovered physical constants that he introduced, h, the
“quantum of action” (Planck’s constant), and k, Boltzmann’s
constant (the constant associated with entropy through the equation
S = k log W and thermal energy through the equipartition relation
Emol = kT.) From a careful t of blackbody radiation data one can
extract quite precise values for both h and k, and Planck did so
immediately after deriving his radiation law in 1900. The constant h
appeared to him completely enigmatic and was not put to any

immediate use, but the constant k, which only later became known
as Boltzmann’s constant,4 was instantly recognized as providing a
theoretical microscope for studying the atom.
In his December 1900 magnum opus Planck states, “To conclude,
I may point to an important consequence of this theory which at the
same time makes possible a further test of its reliability.” He goes on
to show by straightforward steps that the Boltzmann constant
satis es the simple relationship k = R/Na, where R is the constant
in the ideal gas law PV = RT for a mole of gas, and Na is Avogadro’s
number (which has struck fear into so many beginning chemistry
students), the number of atoms contained in a mole of any gas. This
number was imperfectly known in 1900, whereas R was very well
known. Hence by extracting k very precisely from the radiation law,
Avogadro’s number could be determined to unprecedented
precision. Planck found the value Na = 6.175 × 1023, which is

within 2.5 percent of the currently accepted value 6.022 × 1023.
Using the same information, he could determine the mass of a
hydrogen atom, again with high accuracy. Finally, in a coup that
must have impressed the physical chemist, he used considerations
from electrolytic chemistry, Arrhenius’s own eld, to nd the
elementary charge on a proton, obtaining a value within 2.5 percent
of the modern value. In contrast the best-known value of e, the
charge on an electron, measured by J. J. Thomson from electron
studies, was o by 35 percent! Planck concluded his 1900 analysis
with the con dent declaration, “If the theory is at all correct, all of
these relations should not be approximately, but absolutely valid.
The accuracy of the calculations … is thus much better than all
determinations up to now.”
Planck had always been fascinated by fundamental constants as
expressions of the absolute and eternal in physics. Even before his
work of 1900 he had realized that the radiation law involved two
distinct and new fundamental constants. Fundamental constants
allow one to de ne what are called absolute units, units of
measurement relating to the basic laws of physics. For example, the

speed of light, c, provides a natural unit of velocity, because no
signal can travel faster than c and all relativistic phenomena become
more and more important as this speed is approached. In the famous
twin paradox of special relativity, your identical twin ages more and
more slowly compared with you as her relative velocity approaches
c. Planck pointed out that his two newly discovered constants, when
combined with the speed of light and the gravitational constant,
would allow fundamental units to be de ned for all physical
quantities (length, time, temperature, etc.). Transported by this
revelation, the staid professor allowed his inner geek to emerge in
print, rhapsodizing that these units would be valid for “all times and
civilizations … even extraterrestrial ones.” Later, when Planck
became embroiled in a philosophical debate with the Viennese
philosopher-scientist Ernst Mach, Mach would lampoon his
exuberance over fundamental units: “concern for a physics valid for
all times and all peoples, including Martians, seems to me very
premature and even almost comic.”
Nonetheless in 1900 it was these fundamental constants, which
had emerged from his radiation law, that most excited Planck, and
not his unexamined introduction of discontinuity into the laws of
physics. To his disappointment, the rest of the physics community
did not immediately appreciate even this aspect of his
breakthrough. He later recounted:
I could derive some satisfaction from these results. But matters
were viewed quite di erently by other physicists. Such a
calculation of an elementary electrical [charge] from
measurements of thermal radiation was not even given serious
consideration in some quarters. But I did not allow myself to
become disturbed by such a lack of con dence in my constant k.
Nevertheless, I only became completely certain on learning that
Ernest Rutherford had obtained a [very similar] value by
counting alpha particles.
This spectacular agreement between completely disparate physical
phenomena, all pointing to a single consistent atomic picture of the

world, had convinced Arrhenius that Planck alone should be
recognized with the physics Nobel Prize in 1908. It was the
connection to fundamental constants that distinguished Planck’s
work from Wien’s in Arrhenius’s mind, and in his report to the
Nobel Physics Committee he barely mentioned Planck’s derivation
of the radiation law and completely omitted any mention of “quanta
of energy.” Planck’s use of the constant k, he said, had “made it
extremely plausible that the view that matter consists of molecules
and atoms is correct…. No doubt this is the most important
o spring of Planck’s magni cent work.”
Arrhenius’s enthusiasm did not sweep through the conservative
Physics Committee unchallenged. Among its members was the
distinguished experimentalist Knut Angström, who had actually
done experiments on heat radiation and was aware of the
experimental prehistory leading up to Planck’s “act of desperation.”
With much justice he wrote, “it is very far from being that the
theoretical works have guided the experimental ones, but rather
that one could justly make a completely contrary statement.”
However, there was a small problem with his argument that an
experimenter should receive or share the prize: none had been
nominated that year. Angström and the other skeptics on the
Physics Committee were reluctantly convinced by Arrhenius to join
the Planck bandwagon.
And so the modest, upright Planck (who had himself nominated
Rutherford for the physics prize that year) might have received this
honor, not because of a deep appreciation of the true signi cance of
his work, elucidated by Einstein from 1905 to 1907, but rather
because of a general ignorance of its full implications. After the
Physics Section of the Swedish Academy had approved Planck as the
awardee, rumors of the result quickly traveled around the continent,
apparently reaching Planck himself, who stated to the press, “[if
true] I presume that I owe this honor principally to my works in the
area of heat radiation.” But the full Swedish Academy would still
have to approve the recommendation of the Physics Committee, and
in the interim between these votes something had changed the

mood in Stockholm. The most famous theoretical physicist of his
generation, the man Einstein admired the most, had nally spoken
publicly on the Planck law, and his opinion would derail Arrhenius’s
well-laid plans.
Hendrik Antoon Lorentz was born on July 18, 1853, in Arnhem,
the Netherlands, to an unexceptional middle-class family. His
extraordinary brilliance was recognized early, and by the age of
twenty-four he was appointed to the newly created Chair of
Theoretical Physics at the University of Leiden. He devoted his early
years to the application and extension of Maxwell’s theory of
radiation. In particular, while J. J. Thomson is credited with
“discovering the electron” in 1897, Lorentz deduced its existence a
year earlier, in 1896, from his analysis of light emitted from a gas in
the presence of a magnetic eld—the “Zeeman e ect,” discovered
by his former student and assistant Pieter Zeeman. He shared the
Nobel Prize in Physics with Zeeman in 1902 for this work (the rst
theorist to be so honored) and went on to develop an elegant theory
of the interaction of electrons with light, published in 1904. In
related work, Lorentz came to the very edge of the special theory of
relativity, coming up short only by his unwillingness to interpret
relativistic e ects as arising from the relative nature of time, as did
Einstein in 1905. In fact Lorentz was troubled by Einstein’s
approach, complaining, “Einstein simply postulates what we have
deduced with some di culty and not altogether satisfactorily, from
the fundamental equations of the electromagnetic eld.” Despite
these misgivings, within a few years Lorentz became Einstein’s close
con dant and scienti c father gure, supporting and providing
constructive criticism for all his major research.
We have already heard that Einstein regarded Lorentz as the
most powerful thinker he had ever encountered, but his admiration
ran deeper than this because of Lorentz’s elegant, generous, and
kindly spirit. Late in his life Einstein wrote: “Everything which
emanated from his supremely great mind was as clear and beautiful
as a good work of art…. For me personally he meant more than all
of the others I have met in my life’s journey. Just as he mastered

physics and mathematical structures, so he mastered also himself—
with ease and perfect serenity.” Einstein’s attitude toward Lorentz
was, by 1908, shared by much of the European physics and
mathematics community. His encyclopedic knowledge of many
subdisciplines made his opinion the nal word for many. “Whatever
was accepted by Lorentz was accepted; and whatever was rejected
by him was rejected or at best labeled controversial.” He, alone
among all theorists, had preceded Einstein in noting Planck’s
essential use of the “energy element” in his derivation of the
radiation law as early as 1903, and had “wrestled continuously with
this problem [of heat radiation]” in the years leading up to 1908.
Lorentz, with his unmatched mastery of both electromagnetic
theory and the dynamics of electrons, set out to deduce the Planck
radiation law rigorously, directly from the motion of charged
electrons, which radiate and absorb radiation, without introducing
ctitious molecules or “resonators” as Planck had done. But no
matter how hard he tried, he succeeded only in rediscovering the
low-frequency, approximate law of Rayleigh-Jeans (and Einstein),
which led to absurd consequences (in nite energy) at high
frequencies. In April of 1908 he announced his ndings at the
International Congress of Mathematicians in Rome.
The theory of Planck is the only one that would provide us with
a formula in accord with experimental results; but we could
accept it only with the stipulation that we completely rework our
basic conception of electromagnetic phenomena…. However I
must address myself to the question of how the Jeans theory,
which involves no constants other than … [Boltzmann’s
constant] k, can take into account the peak of the radiation
curve which has been demonstrated by experiments [the absence
of high-frequency thermal radiation predicted by Jeans]. The
explanation given by Jeans—which is really the only one that
can be given—is that the maximum is illusory; its existence is
simply an indication that it has not been possible to realize a
body that is black to short wavelengths…. Fortunately, we can

hope that new experimental determinations of the radiation
function will permit a choice between the two theories.
Lorentz, the most respected theoretical physicist of his
generation, was leaning in favor of the Jeans “slow catastrophe”
theory!
The German physics community was initially stunned, and then
apoplectic. Two outstanding experimenters, Lummer and
Pringsheim (whom Angström had favored for the 1908 Nobel Prize)
wrote scathingly, “If we examine the Jeans-Lorentz formula, we see
at rst glance that it leads to completely impossible consequences
which are in crass con ict not only with the results of all
observations of radiation, but with everyday experience.” They
continued with more than a hint of sarcasm: “We might therefore
dismiss this formula without further examination were it not for the
eminence and authority of the two theoretical physicists who defend
it.” Wilhelm Wien expressed the outrage felt by many when he
stated, “I was extremely disappointed by the lecture which Lorentz
presented in Rome…. he came up with nothing more than the old
theory of Jeans without adding any new viewpoint…. [That theory]
is not worthy of discussion in the experimental eld…. What
purpose is served by submitting these questions to mathematicians,
since they can provide no judgment in this matter? … In this instance
Lorentz has not shown himself to be a leader of science” (italics added).
Subjected to this torrent of criticism, even the serene Lorentz
must have had second thoughts. By June 1908, only two months
later, he wrote a long letter to Wien, which contained an apology in
the form of an embarrassing thought experiment. In the RayleighJeans theory (which Lorentz had rederived), the energy emitted as
heat radiation at a given frequency is proportional to the
temperature. A metal such as silver heated to 1200°K (roughly
900°C) will glow with blinding white light. When the temperature is
reduced to room temperature (roughly 300°K), it should still be
emitting one-quarter as much white light, according this theory.
Hence, Lorentz continued, if the theory were right an unheated

silver mirror would glow visibly in the dark! He concluded, “thus
we should really dismiss the Jeans theory … and we are left with
only the theory of Planck. Do not think that I do not respect it, quite
the contrary, I admire it greatly for its boldness and success.”
Lorentz’s speedy retraction and his professed admiration for
Planck’s theory, expressed privately, did not get as much publicity
as his public criticism of it in Rome. A mathematician with
substantial in uence in the Swedish Academy, Gosta Mittag-Le er,
had gotten wind of Lorentz’s critique and used it to his advantage.
He wished to ingratiate himself with the French clique, led by the
great mathematician Poincaré, and to divert the physics prize to the
second-choice candidate, the French pioneer of color photography
Gabriel Lippmann. In this scheme he was aided by the original
nominator of Planck and Wien, the mathematician Ivar Fredholm,
who was unhappy with the elimination of Wien from the award.
Fredholm wrote to Mittag-Le er before the full academy vote was
taken, criticizing the Physics Committee decision and stating
speci cally that Planck had based the derivation of his radiation law
on “a completely new hypothesis, which can hardly be considered
plausible, namely the hypothesis of the elementary quanta of
energy.”
With the sudden realization that Planck’s law was radical and
controversial, his nomination was soundly defeated in the general
academy vote, and the prize was instead awarded to Lippmann.
Mittag-Le er sent a gleeful letter taking credit to a French
mathematician: “It is I, along with Phragmen, who got the prize
awarded to Lippmann. Arrhenius wanted to give it to Planck in
Berlin, but his report, which he had somehow gotten accepted
unanimously by the Committee, was so stupid that I was able to
crush it easily.” The physics world was only beginning to grapple
with the inevitability of the quantum revolution, proclaimed by the
Valiant Swabian in his great works of 1905–7. Planck, Lorentz, and
the other great scientists of Europe would have to look to this
fearless interloper to lead them forward in the quest for a new
microscopic mechanics. More than a decade would pass, and much

would happen, before the Nobel committee would again be willing
to consider giving the prize for an atomic theory.
1

There is some irony here in comparison with Einstein, who sixteen years later would
write to the very same man asking for a job, leading to a famous letter from his father to
Ostwald (behind Einstein’s back) essentially pleading with Ostwald to assent. No known
answer was received, but in 1910 Ostwald became the rst scientist to nominate Einstein
for the Nobel Prize.
2

Rutherford, who had spent many years proving that elements transmuted during
radioactive decay, later joked that “he had seen many transmutations in his time but none
as quick as his own transmutation into a chemist.”
3

Arrhenius did have another reason to be interested in thermal radiation. He was the rst
scientist to recognize the role of CO2 in trapping heat radiation and warming the planet,
and even suggested the possibility that human-generated industrial CO2 emissions would
enhance this e ect. He published this idea in that same year, 1908, arguing that it was a
good thing and might forestall future ice ages.
4

It was initially called by many “Planck’s constant,” leading to no end of confusion until
the conventions settled down, assigning h to Planck and k to Boltzmann.

CHAPTER 15

JOINING THE UNION

“So, now I too am an o cial member of the guild of
whores.” Thus Einstein announced to a friend, Jakob Laub, his longoverdue acceptance into the Swiss professoriate. Einstein had been
appointed extraordinary professor of theoretical physics at the
University of Zurich on May 7, 1909, and was writing shortly
thereafter to describe the last phase of his “hazing” before admission
to the fraternity. This same Laub, a young Austrian physicist who
had studied with Wien, had written Einstein fourteen months
earlier, saying, “I must tell you quite frankly that I was surprised to
read that you must sit in an o ce for eight hours a day. History is
full of bad jokes.” Laub was re ecting the general amazement in
German physics at the mysterious oracle who had emerged in
Switzerland with no fanfare, the protégé of no great man, and
appeared to be rewriting physical theory as a hobby between
reviewing patents. (There may be some truth to the latter in that
Einstein admitted to hiding his physics calculations in his desk at
the patent o ce for occasional perusal.)
What Einstein had done during his rst ve years while working
six days a week at the patent o ce was beyond astonishing. From
1902 to 1904 he produced his fundamental studies in statistical
mechanics, which were underappreciated but laid the foundations
for many of his later breakthroughs. In 1905, the miracle year: light
quanta, Brownian motion, special relativity, and E = mc2, all
eternal contributions to the physics canon. In 1906: the quantum
theory of speci c heats and the announcement that a quantum
mechanics was needed for any correct atomic theory. In 1907: a
masterful review article on relativity theory, which contained for

the rst time the “happiest thought” of Einstein’s life, the thought
that a uniform acceleration was indistinguishable from the presence
of a uniform gravitational eld. This idea became known as the
equivalence principle and provided the germ of the general theory
of relativity, Einstein’s magnum opus. Imagine what the guy could
have done if he had actually had some time to focus on physics.
Having made these modest contributions to science, Einstein
understandably began to think that he might now nd employment
in a university setting, where research would actually be part of the
job description. But the Swiss physics establishment was not easily
diverted from its traditional habits. The University of Bern had a
stodgy, backward department, run by “a few old fogies”; Einstein
had dismissed it as a “pigsty” soon after moving to Bern. To become
a teacher at a university in the Germanic countries, one had to
submit a so-called habilitation thesis, a more extensive and original
work beyond the doctoral thesis. Einstein submitted a group of
seventeen of his research papers for habilitation at the University of
Bern in June of 1907, but the application was rejected, ostensibly
because he had not integrated them into a single handwritten thesis,
but there were other factors at work as well. The professor for
experimental physics, Aimé Forster, saw no real value in adding a
theorist to their faculty, and allegedly returned Einstein’s paper on
special relativity with the comment, “I can’t understand a word of
what you have written here.” Finally, in February 1908, he provided
a more acceptable thesis, not a compilation of his papers but a
speci c work on the blackbody law and the constitution of
radiation,1 and on this basis Einstein was granted the status of
Privatdozent (private instructor) in physics at the university. This
e ort entitled him to provide additional lessons for the physics
students, with no salary, on top of his full-time work at the patent
o ce. However it was a necessary step toward obtaining a
professor’s position.
A few months later the pressure began to mount to end the
embarrassment to Swiss science and award Einstein an actual
academic position in theoretical physics. Lorentz and Minkowski

spoke glowingly of him at the infamous Rome Congress, at which
Lorentz unwittingly undermined Planck’s Nobel nomination; and
Planck’s great respect for Einstein’s work was widely known. It so
happened that an appropriate position was being created at the
University of Zurich, Professor Extraordinarius, to lighten the load of
his nominal thesis adviser, Alfred Kleiner, the Professor Ordinarius.
Despite its impressive sound in translation, an extraordinary
professor was actually a large notch below the “ordinary professor”;
essentially he was a subordinate of Kleiner, with lower salary and
fewer perks. Nonetheless, it was a real portal into an academic
career for Einstein, and an opportunity for Swiss physics to improve
its standing on the continent.
But parochialism would not die easily; Kleiner favored a local
scholar from a well-known family, Friedrich Adler, for the position.
After some back-and-forth, Adler, who was not an outstanding
physicist and really was more interested in philosophy, withdrew
his name from consideration, writing to his father, “[Einstein] will
most likely get the professorship—a man who on principle … should
certainly get it rather than myself … and if he gets it I will … be
very pleased…. [He] was a student at the same time as I, … the
people involved … have a bad conscience about the way they
treated him in the past, and … it is felt to be a scandal, not only
here but also in Germany, that a man like that should sit in the
Patent O ce…. Objectively … it is a ne thing that this man has
asserted himself despite all di culties.”
Even with Adler’s withdrawal, Einstein was not immediately
o ered the job, as Kleiner deemed his teaching ability inadequate.
Einstein had to ask Kleiner for a second teaching evaluation,
through an arranged lecture at the Zurich Physics Society, and this
time was successful, as he explained to Laub: “I was really lucky.
Totally against my usual habit I lectured well.” In a nal indignity
Einstein was o ered a considerably smaller salary than he was
already earning at the patent o ce, but when he refused to take the
position under those circumstances, it was agreed his patent salary
would be matched. The formalities were then executed successfully,

and Einstein was inducted into the guild. It is no wonder that
Einstein was not feeling too grateful for his new position when it
nally materialized in May of 1909.
Einstein’s friend Laub, to whom he announced his appointment,
had previously come to visit Einstein and work with him while he
was still in Bern, shortly after sending his 1908 letter terming
Einstein’s situation a “bad joke.” He thus became the rst scientist
to actually coauthor a paper with Einstein (prior to this Einstein had
been the sole author of every one of his works). In fact, although
Einstein would collaborate intermittently through his career and he
greatly enjoyed discussing physics with colleagues, none of his
greatest papers were to have coauthors,2 and his collaboration with
Laub was no exception. They produced together two
undistinguished papers on relativity theory, and soon after Laub
departed in May of 1908, Einstein set relativity theory aside and
devoted himself solely to radiation/quantum theory. During the
summer and fall of 1908, while Lorentz was still vacillating between
the Rayleigh-Jeans and Planck laws, and the kingpins were
wrangling over Nobel prizes in Stockholm, Einstein had digested the
profound implications of quantization of energy and was trying to
make sense of light quanta.
Already, in January of 1908, Einstein had indicated that his
principal concern was not relativity theory but understanding the
quantum theory, which he now had shown comprised both radiation
(through light quanta) and atomic mechanics (through the quantum
law of speci c heat). At that time he replied to an inquiry from
Arnold Sommerfeld, the other great German theorist of the time
(along with Planck). Sommerfeld had succeeded to Boltzmann’s
chair in theoretical physics in Munich in 1905. He was Prussian
through and through, with a large mustache and a bearing that gave
the “impression of a colonel of the Hussars,” accentuated by a
dueling scar on his face acquired as a member of the drinking and
fencing society (the Burschenschaft) during his student days. Not
only was his appearance intimidating; so also was his intellect,
re ecting a mathematical facility rare even among theoretical

physicists. His initial reaction to Einstein’s work hints at some
resistance to a new Jewish “prophet”; in a letter to Lorentz,
Sommerfeld wrote: “we are now all longing for you to comment on
that whole complex of Einstein’s treatises. Works of genius though
they are, this unconstruable and unvisualizable dogmatism seems to
me to contain something almost unhealthy … perhaps it re ects …
the abstract-conceptual character of the Semite.” This initial bias
dissipated rapidly, however, and soon he would speak of Einstein
with great respect and make major contributions to both relativity
and quantum theory.
In his January letter replying to Sommerfeld, Einstein seems a
bit embarrassed by a previous complimentary letter from him
(which is lost) and begins thus: “Your letter made me uncommonly
happy…. Thanks to my having hit upon the fortunate idea of
introducing the relativity principle into physics, you (and others)
enormously overestimate my scienti c abilities … let me assure you
that if I were in Munich … I would sit in on your lectures in order to
perfect my knowledge of mathematical physics.” Then Einstein gets
to the point. In response to a query from Sommerfeld, he states that
relativity theory does not at all provide a de nitive theory of
electrons: “a physical theory can be satisfactory only when it builds
up its structures from elementary foundations.” Relativity theory, he
says, is like thermodynamics before Boltzmann explained what
entropy means at the atomic level.
I believe that we are still far from having satisfactory elementary
foundations for electrical and mechanical processes. I have come
to this pessimistic view mainly as a result of endless, vain e orts
to interpret the second universal constant [h] in Planck’s
radiation law in an intuitive way. I even seriously doubt that it will
be possible to maintain the general validity of Maxwell’s equations
for empty space [italics added].
A year later, in January 1909, Einstein put this radical idea into
print in a paper titled, “On the Present Status of the Radiation
Problem,” which followed papers of similar focus from Lorentz,

Jeans, and Walter Ritz.3 After some preliminaries he again states the
fundamental contradiction they were all facing, “There can be no
doubt … that our current theoretical views inevitably lead to the
law propounded by Mr. Jeans. However we can consider it …
equally well established that this formula is not compatible with the
facts. Why, after all, do solids emit light only above a xed, rather
sharply de ned temperature? Why are ultraviolet rays not swarming
everywhere…?” After showing again how quantization of energy
leads to Planck’s law, he states, “Though every physicist must
rejoice that Mr. Planck disregarded [the requirements of classical
statistical mechanics] in such a fortunate manner, it should not be
forgotten that the Planck radiation formula is incompatible with the
theoretical foundation from which Mr. Planck started out.”4
Einstein then presents a new and subtle argument (which will be
described below) for why the Planck formula tells us that light has
both particulate and wave properties simultaneously. He concludes,
“In my opinion, the last … considerations conclusively show that
the constitution of radiation must be di erent from what we
currently believe”; therefore “the fundamental [Maxwell] equation
of optics will have to be replaced by an equation in which the
[charge of the electron] e … also appears.” After describing some
constraints he believes that this new equation must satisfy, he
concludes, “I have not yet succeeded in nding a system of
equations ful lling these conditions which would have looked to me
suitable for the construction of the elementary electrical quantum
and the light quanta. The variety of possibilities does not seem so
great, however, for one to shrink from this task.”
Einstein was now focused on nding the “elementary” theory
that he expected would underlie both electromagnetic and atomic
phenomena, the theory that would put solid walls on the framework
of relativity theory, which on its own could go no further in
explaining reality at the molecular scale. He communicated his new
mindset to Laub in June of 1909: “I am ceaselessly concerned with
the constitution of radiation…. This quantum question is so
important and di cult that everyone should be working on it.”

1

Sadly, this thesis, which would have provided a window into his thinking at a fascinating
moment, has been lost.
2

Much later in his career (after 1925) Einstein consistently worked with collaborators but
failed to produce papers of historic signi cance, with one exception. In 1935 he published
with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen a profound work, intended as a critique, pointing
out the nonlocal nature of quantum mechanics (“the EPR paradox”). In fact this feature of
the theory has been experimentally con rmed and plays a key role in the important and
growing eld of quantum information physics.
3

Ritz was a promising young Swiss physicist whom the Zurich search committee had
actually preferred to Einstein, even after Adler withdrew. Ironically Kleiner had described
Ritz, not Einstein, as “an exceptional talent, bordering on genius.” Ritz was denied the
position only because he was terminally ill with tuberculosis, which was to claim his life by
July of 1909.
4

This frank statement elicited a request from Planck that Einstein make it clear that Planck
himself was aware of this problem, which Einstein did in a rather awkward addendum to
the paper.

CHAPTER 16

CREATIVE FUSION

“I am very sorry if I have caused you distress by my
careless behavior. I answered the congratulatory card your wife sent
me on the occasion of my appointment too heartily and thereby
reawakened the old a ection we had for each other. But this was
not done with impure intentions. The behavior of your wife, for
whom I have the greatest respect, was totally honorable. It was
wrong of my wife—and excusable only on account of extreme
jealousy—to behave—without my knowledge—the way she did.” In
June of 1909, Einstein sent this apology to someone he had never
met, George Meyer, who happened to be the husband of Anna
Meyer-Schmid, a woman with whom Einstein had irted on
vacation more than a decade earlier. Anna had read in a newspaper
of Einstein’s appointment as professor in Zurich and had sent him a
congratulatory postcard. He had responded with a warmth that
certainly could have been misconstrued (or indeed correctly
construed): “Your postcard made me immeasurably happy. I …
cherish the memory of the lovely weeks that I was allowed to spend
near you…. [I] am sure that you have become as exquisite and
cheerful a woman today as you were a lovely young girl in those
days…. If you are ever in Zurich and have time, look me up … it
would give me great pleasure.”
Up to this point Einstein’s relationship with his wife had not
entered his correspondence in any problematic fashion, and indeed
he described her as a dutiful and supportive wife and mother. This
was beginning to change. Einstein was becoming well known, if not
yet famous beyond the cognoscenti, and as attention and accolades
came his way, he began to perceive Maric as a brooding, negative,

and jealous gure. The incident just recounted suggests that there
are likely two sides to this story. Einstein’s reply to Anna elicited a
letter from her that apparently had similar overtones and that
somehow came to Maric’s attention. She then wrote directly to
Anna’s husband, rather pathetically claiming that Anna’s
“inappropriate” letter had outraged Einstein, leading nally to
Einstein’s apologetic follow-up with its harsh characterization of his
own wife’s behavior. From Mileva’s viewpoint, success had
disrupted the harmony of their Bohemian household. “With that
kind of fame, he does not have much time left for his wife,” she
wrote to a friend; and later, “I am very happy for his success,
because he really does deserve it…. I only hope that fame does not
exert a detrimental in uence on his human side.” In fact Einstein
maintained his geniality, modesty, and sense of humor through all
his successes, but he did not seem to regard loyalty and
attentiveness to a succession of female companions as part of his
moral code. Over the next four years Einstein’s relationship with
Mileva would deteriorate further, leading ultimately to separation
and a drawn-out divorce.
Einstein’s elevation from the patent o ce to the status of a
university professor, a position of enormous respect in Swiss society,
was indeed almost unprecedented. A colleague who was present
when Einstein submitted his resignation as technical expert second
class recounts that his superior refused to believe that he was
leaving to become a professor at Zurich, yelling at him roughly,
“That’s not true, Herr Einstein. I just don’t believe it. It’s a very poor
joke!” But despite his new prestige, Einstein hardly became a typical
Herr Professor of the Weber variety. He lectured quite informally,
encouraging his students to interrupt and ask questions, and
routinely invited them to further discussions at the Terasse, a café
nearby, or even at his home (where he would brew the co ee
himself). His students very much appreciated this style, which,
despite a certain degree of disorganization, showed his personal
concern for them. And by this point he had become quite a good
teacher, although he was very surprised at how much time this took

from his own research. By November of 1909 he was already
con ding in Besso that “my lectures keep me very busy so that my
actual free time is less than in Bern.” This tension between the
personal pedagogical relationships, which he enjoyed, and his
overriding drive to confront the mysteries at the frontiers of science
ultimately would lead him to escape from mandatory teaching when
the opportunity presented itself. He never found anything as
satisfying as sitting at his desk with a pad of paper serving as
window into the universe. And in 1909 nothing was more puzzling
and obscure in that window than the “shape” of radiation and
quanta.
His January 1909 paper on the current status of the radiation
problem, responding as it did to that of Lorentz and others, gave
Einstein a natural opening to initiate a scienti c correspondence
with the man he most admired. At the end of March 1909 he wrote
to Lorentz:
I am sending you a short paper on radiation theory, which is the
tri ing result of years of re ection. I have not been able to work
my way through to a real understanding of the matter. But I am
sending you the paper all the same, and even ask you to take a
quick look at it, for the following reason. The paper contains
several arguments from which it seems to me to follow that not
only molecular mechanics, but also Maxwell-Lorentz’s
electrodynamics cannot be brought into agreement with the
radiation formula…. I cherish the hope that you can nd the
right way.
A couple of weeks later he followed up with an almost
obsequious note praising the “beauty” of Lorentz’s derivation of the
Jeans law in his Rome lecture and saying that reading it was “a real
event.” Given Einstein’s unshakable insistence that the Jeans law
was the only possible outcome of classical reasoning (stated
repeatedly since 1905 and reiterated in his most recent paper), one
has to wonder if for once he was engaging in a bit of attery. At any
rate he was rewarded a month later with a lengthy reply from

Lorentz, with such detailed scienti c arguments that Einstein opined
“it is a pity” that this “clear and beautiful exposition … will not be
read by all of those who are working in this matter.”
Lorentz begins by pointing out that the Planck energy
quantization rule, εquant = hυ, makes no sense when it is applied to
electrons instead of molecules. Molecules at that point were known
to be combinations of atoms bound together, which naturally
vibrate when they interact with light; in contrast, electrons in solids
are often moving freely as in a gas, and “their existence [free
electrons] in metals can hardly be denied.” Because of this free,
nonperiodic motion, “there can be no question of a de nite
frequency υ, and thus an energy element hυ.” Thus the quantum of
action, h, is not a property of matter in general, but more plausibly
one should “[ascribe] to the ether, and not to [matter,] the property
that energy can be taken up and given o only in de nite quanta.”
Note that Lorentz continues to speak of electromagnetic elds as
sustained by the ether, the notion Einstein hoped to banish with
relativity theory; and he even puts in a mild dig at Einstein and the
relativists: “If one regards h as a constant of the ether, one then
deprives this medium of part of its simplicity, and directly opposes
the views of those physicists who want to deny to ether almost all
‘substantiality.’ ” He then zeros in on the notion of “pointlike”
energy packets of light, Einstein’s light quanta. Interference of light
waves is observed to occur over millions of oscillations,
corresponding to light moving a distance of almost a meter—thus he
concludes that this is the minimum length of the hypothetical
quanta. By a similar argument relating to the focusing of light
through a telescope objective, he argues that their width would also
have to be macroscopic. “The individuality of each single light
quantum would be out of the question,” he concludes, wrapping up
with the meager consolation, “it is a real pity that the light quantum
hypothesis encounters such serious di culties, [as it] is very pretty,
and many of the applications that you and Stark have made of it are
very enticing.”

Finally, Lorentz throws cold water on Einstein’s suggestion that
perhaps a modi cation of Maxwell’s equations will explain all these
conundrums: “as soon as one makes even the slightest change in
Maxwell’s equations, one is faced, I believe, with the greatest
di culties.” Having rejected all of Einstein’s new ideas in the most
supportive and gentle tone possible, he nishes with, “permit me to
say how glad I am that the problems of radiation theory have given
me a chance to enter into a personal relationship with you, after
having admired your papers for such a long time.”

FIGURE 16.1. Einstein with Hendrik Lorentz circa 1918. Museum Boerhaave Leiden.

Einstein seems to have been so pleased to be noticed by the great
man that he was hardly fazed by Lorentz’s dismissal of his ideas.
Shortly after receiving the reply, he wrote to Laub in starstruck
tones: “I am presently carrying on an extremely interesting
correspondence with H. A. Lorentz on the radiation problem. I
admire this man like no other; I might say, I love him.” But this love
would not deter him at all from his project, which was to change
Maxwell’s equations so as to encompass light quanta in some form.
In the same letter he continues, “My work on light quanta is
proceeding at a slow pace. I believe I am on the right track…. But I
haven’t yet gotten far.”
On May 23, 1909, he wrote back to Lorentz an almost equally
long and technical letter explaining his program. He is of course
“delighted” with Lorentz’s detailed letter, which should be read by
the whole community; but he then points out that Lorentz’s
argument that electrons lack a de nite frequency of motion is moot.
Since we don’t know yet the new basic laws of molecular mechanics
and electromagnetism, there can be no contradiction with Planck’s
law, only “the di culty of generalizing Planck’s approach.” Einstein
has correctly perceived that quantum theory is going to be a general
mechanical theory, one implication of which is εquant = hυ for
Planck’s oscillators, but that some di erent relation will apply to
free electrons. He then goes on to describe the general sort of theory
of light quanta that he hopes to develop. In this theory light is
neither a particle nor a wave; instead it consists of pointlike objects
that carry an extended eld along with them, and this eld is
essentially the conventional electromagnetic eld. The pointlike
objects are “singularities” in the eld, where it becomes in nite,
similar to the manner in which the electric eld becomes in nite
near a single-point electric charge. Every time light is absorbed, one
of these pointlike objects disappears and deposits energy hυ, where υ
is the frequency of the light eld. We see here the contrast between
the exible thinking of Einstein and the more rigid views of the

aging master, Lorentz, who is wedded to the old categories of
physics. While in mathematical detail Einstein’s conception is not
very close to our modern theory, it is the rst, albeit groping,
attempt to introduce mathematical objects into physics that are
simultaneously particulate and wavelike, a foundation stone in the
conceptual structure of modern quantum theory.
Einstein concludes his reply to Lorentz with, “I consider it a
great blessing to be able to enter into a closer relationship with
you.” Here the surviving correspondence with Lorentz from this
period ends.
Einstein’s exhilaration in the exchange with Lorentz appears to
be that of a chess master playing at such a high level that he was
delighted to have nally found an opponent who could “give him a
game,” someone against whom he could test his mettle. But Lorentz
could not shake Einstein’s conviction that wave and particle
properties of light coexist and that a new electrical and mechanical
theory would provide a synthesis of these old categories. At this
time Einstein was the only scientist on the planet to perceive this
need. Of the few who understood both Planck’s derivation of the
radiation law and Einstein’s 1905 work, almost all rejected the
notion that the blackbody law implied some form of light quantum.
Lorentz and Planck, the two most knowledgeable actors, now agreed
that “energy elements … play a certain role in the laws of thermal
radiation” but also that the notion of physically localized quanta
should be rejected.
Johannes Stark, the one established physicist to champion the
idea of light quanta at the time, seems to have regarded quanta and
wave theory as irreconcilable. Stark, a talented experimenter who
would win the Nobel Prize in 1919, was a di cult man who tried to
compete in theory beyond his level of competence and became
embroiled in disputes with others about the validity of his theories
and about scienti c priority.1 However, in April of 1907 it was he
who had o ered Einstein his rst paid academic job, as an assistant
in his lab, which Einstein declined for nancial reasons (it paid
much less than the patent job). And it was Stark who invited

Einstein to do the important review article on relativity theory in
which the principle of equivalence was rst announced. Ironically,
this rst reputable supporter of Einstein’s quantum ideas would
become, many years later, a leader, with Philip Lenard, of the Nazi
movement against “Jewish physics.” All this was in the distant
future in July of 1909, when Einstein wrote to his ally, Stark,
relating that Planck “stubbornly opposes material (localized)
quanta.” “You cannot imagine,” he continues, “how hard I have
tried to contrive a satisfactory mathematical formulation of the
quantum theory. But I have not succeeded thus far.” Despite his
frustration, he is “[looking] forward to making [Stark’s]
acquaintance in Salzburg.”
In fact, at that time, Albert Einstein, the paradigm-shattering
conjurer of modern physics, still had not met a single one of the
leading physicists of Europe, not Planck, nor Lorentz, nor
Sommerfeld, nor Wien (all of whom had corresponded with him).
That was about to change. Once a year, since 1822, the physicists of
the German-speaking countries assembled in a di erent city at a
major convention of more than 1,300 scientists and physicians, the
Deutsche Gesellschaft der Naturforscher und Arzte. In 1908 the
assembly had convened in Cologne, and Einstein had planned to
attend, but exhaustion prevented him from using his meager
vacation time from the patent o ce for this trip. He had been a star
in absentia; it was at that meeting that the mathematician
Minkowski had added four-dimensional frills to Einstein’s relativity
theory and announced the “union” of space and time into a single
space-time continuum. But nally, in 1909, with the meeting to be
held in Salzburg, Einstein had been invited (probably by Planck) to
give a plenary lecture; the new messiah would nally be seen and
heard by the congregation and make the acquaintance of the elder
prophets. Wolfgang Pauli, who would lead the next generation of
quantum theorists, termed this event “one of the turning points in
the evolution of theoretical physics.”
When Einstein stepped to the podium on the afternoon of
September 21 there were over a hundred colleagues in attendance,

including Planck, who chaired the session, Wien, Rubens (the
blackbody experimenter), and Sommerfeld, as well as younger
physicists who would become friendly with Einstein, such as Max
von Laue, Max Born, Fritz Reiche, and Paul Epstein. Planck
apparently expected him to review the now–accepted relativity
theory, but he had chosen a title consonant with his current
interests, “On the Development of Our Views concerning the Nature
and Constitution of Radiation.” He begins his lecture in familiar
territory: “Once it has been recognized that light exhibits the
phenomenon of interference … it seemed hardly doubtful … that
light is to be conceived as wave motion.” This wave motion seems
to require an ether in which to propagate, he notes, quoting an
authoritative text that designates the existence of the ether as a
“near certainty” (we have seen that both Lorentz and Planck are still
using the ether concept). But Einstein is having none of it:
“However, today we must regard the ether hypothesis as an obsolete
standpoint.”
Having rudely dismissed the central dogma of electromagnetic
theory for forty years, he says it is “undeniable” that certain
properties of light suggest a particulate nature. Then, the bombshell:
It is therefore my opinion that the next stage in the development
of theoretical physics will bring us a theory of light that can be
understood as a kind of fusion of the wave and emission
[particle] theories of light. To give reasons for this opinion and
to show that a profound change in our views on the nature and
constitution of light is imperative is the purpose of the following
remarks.
These remarks are prescient; exactly such a “fusion” theory of light
would arise, but it would take almost sixteen years for its earliest
forms to emerge, and no other physicist would share Einstein’s
vision of the future of physics for almost as long.
Having already nailed his revolutionary thesis to the church
door, Einstein proceeds with the sermon. He brie y reviews how
relativity theory has made the ether super uous and has suggested

that light is an independent entity, not a disturbance in a medium.
However, he makes it clear that relativity theory does not itself
require light quanta. “Regarding our conception of the structure of
light … the theory of relativity does not change anything. It is
nevertheless my opinion … that we are at the threshold of highly
signi cant developments…. What I shall say is … the result of
considerations that have not yet been su ciently checked by others.
If I nonetheless present these considerations, this should not be
attributed to excessive con dence in my views but rather to the
hope that I may induce one or another among you to concern
himself with the problem in question.”
He then goes on to review the many processes, such as the
photoelectric e ect, that seem to depend on the frequency of light
and not on its intensity, an elaboration of the same considerations
that began in his 1905 paper. This leads him to Planck’s derivation
of the black-body law and the mysterious “energy element,” where
he again minces no words: “to accept Planck’s theory means plainly
to reject the foundations of our [classical] radiation theory.” But
Planck’s theory, he points out, has just been veri ed yet again by
the measurements of Rutherford and Geiger on the value of the
elementary charge (the event on which Arrhenius had based his
Nobel nomination of Planck a year earlier). Since we cannot reject
the Planck law, we must interpret it through quanta of light.
In a Socratic ourish, Einstein then puts on the brakes. “Isn’t it
conceivable that Planck’s formula is correct, but that nevertheless a
derivation of it can be given that is not based on an assumption as
horrendous-looking…?” His answer to the imagined conservative
(who could well have been Planck himself) is a resounding negative.
He has a trick up his sleeve, an argument that for the rst time does
not tend to prove that light is a particle or to prove that light is a
wave. He has an argument to prove it is both.
His argument is based on another of his ingenious thought
experiments. He imagines a cavity that contains a perfect gas at
temperature T and, necessarily, thermal radiation, distributed in
frequency according to Planck’s law, in equilibrium with that gas

(i.e., having the same temperature). In this blackbody cavity is
suspended a perfectly re ecting mirror on a rail that can thus move
freely in the direction perpendicular to its surface. This mirror is in
contact with the gas, and it will su er collisions with gas molecules
at irregular intervals, causing it to move randomly to the left or
right.2 But the mirror also experiences another force, which is due
to the pressure of the thermal radiation re ecting o each of its
surfaces. This force of radiation pressure is not a quantum e ect and
had been known since the time of Maxwell; it is responsible for the
tail on comets (as hypothesized by none other than Arrhenius). In
the context of Einstein’s mirror experiment it has an interesting
property: “The forces of pressure exerted on the two sides are equal
if the plate is at rest. However, if it is in motion, more radiation will
be re ected on the [front surface] than on the back surface. The
backward-acting force of pressure … is thus larger than the force of
pressure acting on the back surface,” leading the plate to experience
“radiation friction” opposing its motion.
But this cannot be the only e ect of the radiation, because if it
were, the mirror would be continually taking energy out of the gas
through the molecules’ collisions with the mirror and e ectively
transferring it to radiation, hence heating up the radiation,
something we know from experience does not occur. The resolution
of this paradox is that the radiation, besides it average tendency to
slow down the plate, has the same kind of irregular uctuations in
its interaction with the plate as do the gas molecules, transferring
back to the plate as much energy as it is receiving on average. It is
easiest to imagine this force as arising from the random arrival of
unequal numbers of light quanta on each side of the plate, just as
the force due to the gas arises from collisions with unequal numbers
of molecules on either side. It looks like another argument for light
quanta is about to emerge. But this is not where Einstein is heading.
Assuming that the Planck law is correct, Einstein can calculate the
uctuating force of radiation, and to the surprise of the crowd3 he
obtains two contributions to the force. The rst is indeed just what
one would expect from “molecules” of light with energy hυ (and

momentum hυ/c, where c is the speed of light) hitting each side of
the mirror randomly. But the second term is precisely what Maxwell
would have expected, uctuations in radiation pressure arising from
complicated interference between light waves moving in both
directions.4 There you have it: the magician has removed the screen
to show that the lady he has just sawed in half is in fact whole
again. Wavelike and particle-like e ects coexist in the same formula,
a formula that follows simply from the existence of equilibrium
between matter and radiation, and the undeniable validity of
Planck’s radiation law.
Einstein concludes by sketching his “singularity” picture for a
new theory of radiation, while admitting “it has not yet been
possible to formulate a mathematical theory of radiation that would
do justice to the undulatory structure and … quantum structure [of
radiation]…. All I wanted is brie y to indicate … that the two
structural properties (undulatory and quantum) simultaneously
displayed by radiation … should not be considered as mutually
exclusive.”
Planck, as chairman, rose to moderate the discussion of
Einstein’s paper. One can imagine a hush of expectation: how would
the great man respond to this radical proposal concerning the nature
of light, from the physicist whose work on relativity Planck had
promoted and lauded so widely. A hint emerges as Planck thanks
the audience for “listening with greatest interest … even where
opposition may have emerged.” He continues, “Most of what the
lecturer has been saying will not meet with any disagreement. I too
emphasize the necessity of introducing certain quanta … the
question is where to look for those quanta. According to … Mr.
Einstein, it would be necessary to conceive … [of] light waves
themselves as atomistically constituted, and hence to give up
Maxwell’s equations. This seems to me a step which in my opinion is
not yet necessary…. I think that rst of all one should attempt to
transfer the whole problem of the quantum theory to the area of the
interaction between matter and radiation.” The voice of

conservative reason has been heard; we are not ready for photons,
and certainly not for wave-particle duality.
Much later a young physicist who was in the audience, Paul
Epstein, was questioned as to the persuasiveness of Einstein’s
Salzburg lecture. “It had no [great e ect],” Epstein replied. “You see
the chairman of the meeting was Planck, and he immediately said
that it was very interesting but he did not quite agree with it. And
the only man who seconded it was Johannes Stark. You see, it was
much too far advanced.”
1

A year later Einstein gave a blunt analysis of one such squabble in a letter to Laub: “The
quarrel between Stark and Sommerfeld is unedifying. Stark has once again produced
unadulterated rubbish … nothing sensible ever comes out of a quarrel.”
2

This random momentum should correspond to an average kinetic energy of motion kT/2
due to the equipartition theorem; the mirror is assumed macroscopic so that the quantum
e ects, which violate equipartition, can be neglected.
3

Fritz Reiche, a young physicist in the audience, recalls: “I was very much impressed by
the second term in the uctuation formula…. I remember of course that people were
opposed and tried to nd another reason.”
4

Einstein interprets this term as due to Maxwell waves but doesn’t derive it from
Maxwell’s equations; shortly afterward Lorentz himself lled in this step.

CHAPTER 17

NERNST

THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING

I visited Prof. Einstein in Zurich. It was for me an extremely
stimulating and interesting meeting. I believe that, as regards the
development of physics, we can be very happy to have such an
original young thinker; a “Boltzmann redivivus [reborn].”
—WALTHER NERNST, MARCH 1910
Although in Salzburg it was clear to observers such as
Max Born that “Einstein’s achievement received its seal [of
approval] before the assembled world of scientists,” the
achievement most recognized was his theory of relativity, which by
then had been well con rmed by the fast-electron experiments of
Alfred Bucherer in Bonn. As just noted, Einstein’s quantum
hypotheses were regarded by all the leaders present in Salzburg as
perhaps inventive, but certainly rash and premature. This
impression was possibly facilitated by Einstein’s decision not to
mention in his lecture his lesser-known work on the speci c heat of
solids. This work, showing that Planck’s distribution law of thermal
radiation could also be applied to electrically neutral vibrations of
atoms, clearly indicated the necessity of a non-Newtonian atomic
mechanics, as opposed to treating Planck’s “energy element” as
some anomaly associated only with the interaction of radiation and
matter, as Planck had suggested. But there was one leader, not
present at Salzburg, who was keenly aware of Einstein’s work on
speci c heat, and to whom it was a very big deal. His name was
Walther Nernst.

Nernst was a physical chemist, like Arrhenius, and indeed the
two met in their twenties while Arrhenius was studying in Germany
in 1886 and became fast friends, as well as boisterous drinking
companions. Arrhenius pronounced Nernst’s work on heat
conduction “the best that any laboratory practitioner has done in a
long time” and got him invited to work with his patron, Ostwald, in
Leipzig. Like Arrhenius, Nernst was not much to look at. He was
short of stature with a “ shlike mouth” and had a distinctive, highpitched voice that was often employed in claiming priority for some
idea or other, which he typically insisted had already appeared in
his famous textbook on physical chemistry. When, in the early
1900s, Nernst became well known in Berlin society, a joke
circulated about a superman whose brain God had created but
whose body had been left to lesser craftsmen. The disappointing
result was then brought to life by the Devil for amusement; you can
guess the name of this golem.
Nernst himself had a distinctive form of sarcastic humor, which
he expressed with a completely deadpan delivery. For example,
surrounded by avid hikers including Planck, who climbed
mountains well into his seventies, he would opine that he too had
climbed a mountain once in his youth, and that would su ce for a
lifetime. He was indeed a talented scientist; Einstein praised “his
truly amazing scienti c instinct combined both with a sovereign
knowledge of an enormous volume of factual materials … and with
a rare mastery of the experimental methods and tricks in which he
excelled.” Despite what Einstein called his “childlike vanity,” he
was, according to Nernst trainee Robert Millikan, “in the main,
popular in the laboratory, despite the fact that in the academic
world he nearly always had a quarrel on with somebody.” Millikan
recounts that in 1912 he wrote a review chapter for Nernst’s famous
textbook, dealing with the determination of the electric charge, e
(the topic on which Millikan would eventually do Nobel-winning
research). Nernst initially accepted the draft, but after Jean Perrin, a
well-known French physicist and eventual Nobel laureate himself,
annoyed Nernst at a conference, he demanded that Millikan

expunge every mention of the man’s name from the chapter. Perrin’s
o ense was speaking too long in the lecture before Nernst was
scheduled to speak, hence depriving Nernst of some of his allotted
time. Such a combination of determination, charisma, and pettiness
was Walther Nernst.
These qualities conspired to make Nernst one of the most
successful scienti c “operators” of the twentieth century, a person
capable of convincing o cials in government and industry of the
importance of scienti c work in general, and of his own
contributions in particular. Soon these attributes would have a great
in uence on Einstein’s career and on the development of quantum
theory. Nernst’s political savvy showed itself early in his career. At
age twenty-four, in 1888, he developed an idea, originally due to
the chemist van ‘t Ho , into an important relation now known as
the Nernst equation, which allows the useful energy of a chemical
reaction to be estimated from electrochemical measurements, and
he quickly parlayed this into an academic position at Göttingen. By
1895 he had procured a full professorship and his own physical
chemistry institute there, obtained under the threat of leaving for a
position in Munich. Around that time he began working on one of
the key technological problems of the era: cheap, durable electric
lighting. In fact electric lighting provided a primary motivation for
the momentous research program on blackbody radiation by
Rubens, Kurlbaum, and others that was reaching fruition at almost
the same time.
By 1897 Nernst had developed and patented the “Nernst lamp,”
based on a heated cerium oxide glass rod, which was superior in a
number of ways to the incandescent metal lament bulb pioneered
by Edison and others. Understanding that the development of the
market for lighting was unpredictable, Nernst refused to accept
royalties for his invention, which was licensed by the German rm
AEG, instead insisting on a large lump sum payment up front. As
perhaps Nernst had foreseen, his lamp shone brightly for a few
years, magni cently lighting the German pavilion at the Paris
Exhibition of 1900 and selling over four million units in the next

decade, but eventually losing out to the less-expensive tungsten
lament technology perfected by a former Nernst student, the
chemist Irving Langmuir. Long before this denouement Nernst had
visited Edison in American in 1898, and after being subjected to a
lecture on the irrelevance of academic work by the aging inventor,
he shouted into Edison’s ear trumpet, “How much did you get for
your light-bulb patent?” Upon Edison’s reply that he got nothing,
Nernst bellowed, “I got a million marks1 for mine! The trouble with
you Edison is that you are not a good businessman!”
Because of his negotiating acumen, the commercial failure of his
lamp was of little consequence;2 Nernst was now a wealthy man and
a gure to be reckoned with in German society. In 1905 he accepted
a professorship at the center of German science, the University of
Berlin, where he became a close associate of Planck, whose earlier
thermodynamic work had put the Nernst equation on a more sound
theoretical footing. His distinguished colleague in Berlin, the
organic chemist Emil Fischer, who already had receive the Nobel
Prize in 1902, described him approvingly as “versatile, manyfaceted, full of curiosity and enterprise.” His students referred to
him jokingly as the Kommerzienrat, German for a successful
businessman (in contrast to the usual Geheimrat, denoting a
distinguished scholar). Even before moving, he had been decorated
by the emperor and appointed privy councillor, and upon his arrival
he was immediately admitted to the prestigious Prussian Academy
of Sciences.
Around this time he made the most important scienti c
discovery of his life, a principle that is now known as the Third Law
of thermodynamics. This principle, in modern terms, is expressed by
the statement that the entropy of any system tends to zero as its
temperature tends to absolute zero. Unlike the other two laws of
thermodynamics, which don’t require quantum e ects to make
sense, this law is all about quantum “freezing.” According to
Boltzmann, a system’s entropy depends on the number of its
accessible states at a given temperature. We already have seen from
Einstein’s work on vibrations in solids that when a solid gets very

cold the atoms cannot vibrate, because they don’t have enough
thermal energy to reach even the rst excited quantum level, which
is hυ higher in energy than the lowest (ground) state. In other words
the system tends toward a single, unique ground state, and the
entropy, by de nition, is zero. Nernst’s law says this always happens
for any system, no matter how complicated.
Why, you may ask, would a chemist with a practical and
empirical bent like Nernst care deeply about this apparently abstract
principle? Because for some years previously it had been realized
that knowledge of a system’s low-temperature entropy behavior
would allow one to use chemical reaction data over a limited range
of temperatures and predict at other temperatures and pressures
how much of each product a particular reaction would yield, a
fundamental question in all of chemistry. Nernst quickly set out to
calculate the “reaction constants” that followed from his principle
and showed that they predicted well the results of various
experiments. Already in 1910, when he was meeting Einstein for the
rst time, his approach had been crucially employed by his
colleague Fritz Haber to facilitate the development of a chemical
technique of immense importance for humanity, the process for
removing nitrogen from the air to make ammonia for fertilizer (and
explosives).
Characteristically, Nernst referred to the principle he had
discovered as “his theorem,” which is exactly what it wasn’t. A
theorem is something logically deduced from other accepted rules or
axioms. Nernst’s “theorem” was a hypothesis based on analysis of
data; it had no grounding in atomic theory at all, nor could it have
had at that time. Systems that obey the equipartition principle of
classical mechanics do not obey Nernst’s law; so his conjecture
actually contradicted the currently accepted theory. We now know
quantum ideas are essential for the validity of this principle. And
that is where Einstein comes in.
Nernst surely realized that his “theorem” was going to require
some microscopic underpinning to become a law. And there were
absolutely no hints of a microscopic theory that would violate

equipartition coming from the leading theorists of the time. Yes,
there was that strange business about the radiation law, but it
seemed, as Planck would surely have advised him, to relate mainly
to matter in interaction with radiation. Thus one can imagine his
excitement when he became aware of Einstein’s 1907 paper,
explaining how applying Planck ideas to vibrations in solids
predicted a violation of equipartition, and just the kind of violation
(the freezing out of vibrations) that would justify Nernst’s
“theorem.” No wonder that in early March 1910 Nernst made a
special trip to Zurich to meet the wunderkind who had provided the
rst mathematical theory consistent with his historic conjecture.
Despite Einstein’s rise in status as an associate professor, very
few of his colleagues and acquaintances had any idea that a major
intellectual gure was among them. His informality with the
students and his ever-present sense of humor hardly signaled an
august personage; and his dress had not improved greatly from the
time he used a runner from his dresser as an impromptu scarf. His
rst (and only) doctoral student, Hans Tanner, describes his “rather
shabby attire, with trousers too short for him and an iron watch
chain,” hastening to add that his lecturing style immediately
“captured our hearts.” An associate professorship for a man with a
family could not have supported much elegance anyway; an older
colleague at the time wrote of Einstein, to none other than
Arrhenius, “I am most interested in the associate professor at the
university, A. Einstein, a still young, totally brilliant chap from
whom one can learn a lot…. I believe he has a great future, at
present he lives with his wife and children in very modest
conditions. He certainly deserves a better fate.”
The general impression of Einstein’s status changed suddenly and
dramatically after Nernst’s visit. George Hevesy, a young assistant at
the Zurich Poly at that time, who went on to become a Nobel
laureate in chemistry, recalls that Nernst’s visit “made Einstein
famous. Einstein in 1909 was unknown in Zurich. Then Nernst came
and people in Zurich said ‘that Einstein must be a clever fellow if

the great Nernst comes all the way from Berlin to Zurich to talk to
him.’ ”
Very little is known about the details of this visit except that
Nernst lled Einstein in on the state-of-the-art measurements of
speci c heat as a function of temperature being done in his
laboratory, and Einstein surely impressed Nernst with his profound
understanding of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, and
with his thoughts on how the quantum hypothesis could clear up
many issues. Nernst’s reaction is worth quoting at length:
I visited Prof. Einstein in Zurich. It was for me an extremely
stimulating and interesting meeting. I believe that, as regards the
development of physics, we can be very happy to have such an
original young thinker; a “Boltzmann redivivus [reborn]”; the
same certainty and speed of thought; great boldness in theory,
which however cannot harm, since the most intimate contact
with experiment is preserved. Einstein’s “quantum hypothesis” is
probably among the most remarkable thought [constructions]
ever; if it is correct then it indicates completely new paths both
for the so-called “physics of the ether” and for all molecular
theories; if it is false, well, then it will remain for all times “a
beautiful memory.”
The most striking thing about this remarkable quotation is that
Nernst, Max Planck’s close colleague and friend, refers to Einstein’s
quantum hypothesis without mentioning Planck at all. It is clear to
him that in the hands of Einstein, Planck’s ad hoc patch-up of
radiation theory has become something very di erent: a vision of a
completely new electromagnetic and molecular theory. In fact, there
is no indication that Einstein’s 1907 proclamation of a sweeping
quantum revolution in molecular mechanics was noted by anyone
until Nernst took it up, apparently in late 1909 or early 1910. Not a
single paper had been written relating to the quantum theory as
applied to speci c heat between early 1907, when Einstein’s work
appeared, and February 17, 1910, when Nernst read his rst paper
on the subject to the Prussian Academy of Sciences, mentioning

Einstein’s theory brie y at the end.3 With Nernst leading the charge
this changed dramatically; ten such papers appeared in 1911, and
over thirty total in the subsequent two years. Moreover it is very
likely that, during or shortly after that visit, Nernst conceived the
project of bringing Einstein to Berlin; a postcard from Nernst dated
July 31, 1910, begins, “I have made inquiries regarding Einstein,
but have not yet received any news.”
As for Einstein, who by now had been struggling fruitlessly for
more than two years to explain light quanta by modifying Maxwell’s
equations, the visit by Nernst was a great morale boost. A week
after Nernst left he wrote to Laub: “For me the theory of quanta is a
settled matter. My predictions regarding the speci c heats are
apparently being brilliantly con rmed. Nernst, who has just been
here to see me, and Rubens are busily engaged in the experimental
veri cation, so that we will soon know where we stand.” And three
months later he wrote to Sommerfeld with further results: “It seems
incontrovertible that energy of a periodical nature, wherever it
occurs, always occurs in energy quanta that are multiples of hυ …
[whether] as radiation or as oscillation of material [molecular]
structures…. It now seems pretty certain that as regards the heat
content, the molecules of solid substances behave essentially similar
to Planck’s resonators. Nernst found the relationship con rmed in
the case of silver and some other substances.”
But all this support for his heuristic ideas did not for one minute
distract him from the underlying challenge: how do wave and
particle properties manage to coexist in a full mathematical theory
of quantum mechanics or electrodynamics? With characteristic wit
he summarized his view in the same letter to Sommerfeld. “The
crucial point in the whole question seems to me to be: ‘Can energy
quanta and Huygens’ principle [of wave interference] be made
compatible with each other?’ The appearances are against it but, as
it seems, the Lord knew all the same how to get out of the tight
spot.”

1

The equivalent of roughly 4.5 million 2008 dollars. Diane Barkan, in her biography of
Nernst, states that the actual amount Nernst received is unveri able, but the legend
persists.
2

One consequence his invention did have, ironically, was the rupture of his friendship
with Arrhenius. In 1897 in Stockholm Nernst demonstrated his lamp for Arrhenius, who
laughed vigorously when it blew all the fuses in the hotel. From this small incident a
lifelong feud nucleated, with the consequence that Nernst received the Nobel Prize only in
1921, after many lesser lights of chemistry had been so recognized.
3

“The speci c heat decreases strongly at low temperatures … corresponding to the
requirements of Einstein’s theory [that] it tends to zero” (Nernst, February 17, 1910).

CHAPTER 18

LAMENTING THE RUINS

As for knowing, nobody knows anything. The whole story would
be a delight to diabolical Jesuit fathers.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN, NOVEMBER 1911
A distinguished white-haired man, impeccably dressed,
just over seventy, took the podium to explain his theory. In the
small audience of twenty-four, listening attentively, were Einstein,
Lorentz, Planck, Nernst, Wien, Rutherford, Madame Curie, Jean
Perrin, and H. K. Onnes, all of whom were current or future Nobel
laureates, as well as major scienti c gures such as Sommerfeld,
Rubens, Poincaré, and Jeans. The venue was a small meeting room
in the elegant Hotel Metropole in Brussels.
I decided to take as my starting point the one general concept
that could meet the demands of the most scrupulous,
philosophical and constructive mind: positive and negative ether,
atomically and invariably cubi able. The interfaces between
them form alternating positive and negative atomic planes; there
is a universal competition between these two di erent ethers,
although they are essentially the same, because of spaci able
and
super cialisable
molecules.
Spaci cation
and
super cialisation are energetically produced, and energy is
produced exclusively by molecular contacts. Molecular contact,
which has hitherto been neglected, is an essential element in my
theory…. I undertook to create the active Universe with the

intimate and well-de ned mechanism of its own primitive
elements.
Upon his conclusion, none of the assembled dignitaries rose to
take issue with either the correctness or the coherence of this
eccentric “theory of everything.” On the contrary, Lorentz, the
admired chairman of the proceedings, took pains to thank the
speaker for “the report he was good enough to send us and … the
talk he has just given us explaining its main ideas.” And why had
the brilliant men and woman present suspended their otherwise
highly developed critical faculties? They were engaging in a timehonored ritual of both art and science: humoring the wealthy
patron.
The speaker was the prosperous Belgian industrialist Ernest
Solvay, inventor of an e cient and lucrative process for making
soda, now an exponent of scienti c progress across all spheres of
human activity and a dilettante physical theorist. The occasion of
his exposition was the legendary First Solvay Congress of 1911, the
beginning of the modern specialized science conference. Monsieur
Solvay, enlisted through the political acumen of Nernst, had footed
the entire bill for this opulent and exclusive gathering of the crème
de la crème of European physics. Fortunately, Solvay’s own
“gravito-materialist” theory did not occupy much of the subsequent
discussions of atomic theory, which his scienti c assistant said he
regarded as too “highly specialized.”
Einstein had arrived in Brussels from a very di erent place—
intellectually, professionally, and geographically—than he had been
only nineteen months earlier when he had been so delighted and
attered by Nernst’s visit to Zurich. From the practical point of
view, Nernst’s visit marked the beginning of a meteoric rise in
Einstein’s stature and conditions, culminating in the invitation to
deliver the concluding “report” at the Brussels conference, perhaps
the most elite gathering of scientists in history. Einstein’s associate
professor position at the University of Zurich was hardly a sinecure;
it barely o ered him a middle-class living and was not part of any

track that would lead him to the position of an Ordinarius, or full
professor, who could call his own shots. However, a bare ve weeks
after Nernst concluded his visit in early March of 1910, Einstein was
nominated for a full professor’s position at the German University in
Prague, a post he was eager to take, despite his comfort with life in
Zurich, because it was a necessary step up the ladder of scienti c
advancement. During the summer of 1910 the appointment stalled
brie y as, for the rst time, explicit anti-Semitism seemed to block
Einstein’s career; the cognizant ministry in Vienna decided to
appoint the second choice of the search committee, an Austrian,
Gustav Jaumann, whose role in the history of science is limited to
this one cameo appearance. Fortunately for Einstein, in an
expression of wounded pride, memorable for its inaccuracy,
Professor Jaumann e ectively withdrew his candidacy, accusing the
university of “chasing after modernity while being blind to real
merit.” As a result, by April of 1911, Einstein and family had moved
to Prague, where he took up his new position as full professor of
theoretical physics.

FIGURE 18.1. Einstein, the newly minted full professor, in Prague, 1912. ETH-Bibliothek
Zurich, Image Archive.

This was his status when he appeared at the Solvay Congress in
October of 1911, but his circumstances were still uid, with a
steady current upward. Even before he left Zurich, he had been
contacted by Emil Fischer, the German Nobel laureate in chemistry,
with the extraordinary news that an anonymous industrial donor,
likely prompted by Nernst, had o ered Einstein a gift of fteen
thousand marks “to promote your [scienti c] work,” with no strings
attached.1 By now Planck had publicly described the theory of
relativity as “in boldness [surpassing] anything so far achieved in
speculative natural science … [it] can only be compared to … [the
revolution] produced by the introduction of the Copernican world
system.” It was unlikely that Prague could keep this rising star for
long. Only a few months after Einstein’s move there, his close friend
Heinrich Zangger, dean of the medical faculty at the University of
Zurich and someone whom Einstein admired greatly, began
campaigning to bring him back to Zurich by creating a full
professor’s position at his alma mater, the Zurich Poly.2 While
Einstein was outwardly courteous regarding conditions in Prague,
he felt isolated and estranged from the culture, privately con ding
that “the air is full of soot, the water life-threatening, the people
super cial”; in hindsight he termed the city “semi-barbaric.” Thus
when Zangger’s campaign was successful, Einstein immediately
accepted the position. He ended up returning to Zurich, with this
much-improved status, in July of 1912, barely a year after moving
to Prague. His return was made easier by an act of God: the death of
his old nemesis, Weber, which he unsentimentally pronounced “a
good thing for the Polytechnic.” In the middle of all this
professional back-and-forth, Mileva had given birth to his second
son, Eduard, in the summer of 1910, notwithstanding which his
relationship with his wife continued to deteriorate.
Throughout all this change, the constant in Einstein’s life was his
scienti c work, and in particular his focus on what he considered
the most important problem of the day, quantum theory. Nernst’s

visit to see Einstein in Zurich, and Nernst’s high-pro le focus on
quantum problems, had
nally begun to make the physics
community aware of what Einstein had known since 1907: there
were really two puzzles of quantum theory. The radiation formula,
photoelectric e ect, and other similar phenomena suggested that
light, conventionally conceived as a wave, came in quantized energy
units, hυ, and had particulate properties. At the same time the
speci c heat theory, now corroborated in its essentials by Nernst’s
experiments, pointed strongly to the proposition that molecular
mechanics violated Newton’s laws and also involved quantization of
energy in units of hυ, at least when the molecular motion was
periodic. Since these vibrations could be electrically neutral and
thus not interact with light directly, this behavior appeared to be
essentially independent of the quantum properties of radiation.
Einstein had a major decision to make: which quantum problem
would he focus on? He chose the quantum theory of radiation.
Already in early 1909 Einstein had con ded to his idol, Lorentz,
that his program was to tinker with Maxwell’s equations in order to
generate a theory of light quanta. Lorentz, who undoubtedly had the
deepest understanding of electromagnetic theory of his generation,
had warned Einstein, “as soon as one makes even the slightest
change in Maxwell’s equations, one is faced … with the greatest
di culties.” As he toiled onward through 1909 and 1910, Einstein
began to realize that Lorentz was prescient; changing Maxwell’s
equations was like touching up the Mona Lisa. Not frivolously had
Boltzmann proclaimed of these equations, “was it God that wrote
those lines?” The mathematical structure was perfect, and every
modi cation implied a contradiction with the multitude of known
electromagnetic phenomena. Einstein was in the midst of these
di cult explorations in September of 1909 when he admitted in the
conclusion of his Salzburg lecture, “it has not been possible to
formulate a mathematical theory of radiation which will do justice
both to the undulatory structure and the … quantum structure….
[The] uctuation properties of radiation [that he had demonstrated
in his lecture] … o er few formal clues on which to build a theory.”

He boldly prophesied the emergence of a fusion theory of radiation,
yet had nothing to show in support but his vague notion of
“singularities” attached to an extended eld, which he quickly
quali ed with the statement, “no importance should be attached to
such a picture as long as it has not led to an exact theory.”
In his correspondence throughout the year after Salzburg lecture,
Einstein repeatedly alludes to his struggles with radiation theory.
On New Year’s Eve of 1909 he writes again to Laub, who was his
constant sounding board during this period: “I have not yet arrived
at solution to the light quanta question, but I have found quite a few
signi cant things while working at it. I’ll see whether I might not
yet succeed in hatching this favorite egg of mine.” In January of
1910 in a letter to Sommerfeld he describes his increasingly radical
hypotheses to explain the dual properties of radiation: “maybe the
electron is not to be conceived as such a simple structure as we
think? There is nothing one would not consider when one is in a
predicament.” By July of that year, buoyed by Nernst’s visit, he
writes again to Sommerfeld, con dent that the two quantum
hypotheses (for light and for matter) are correct but allowing that
no progress has been made reconciling quanta and waves. He has
decided that “[a] crudely materialistic conception of the point
structure of radiation … cannot be worked out.” On August 2, to
Laub, shortly after being visited by Sommerfeld, he writes: “I have
not made any progress regarding the question of the constitution of
light. There is something very fundamental at the bottom of it.”
Then, again to Laub, in November of 1910, a ray (or wave?) of light:
“At the moment I am very hopeful that I will solve the radiation
problem, and that I will do so without light quanta. I am awfully
curious how the thing will turn out. One would have to give up the
energy principle [conservation of energy] in its current form.” Alas,
one week later: “The solution of the radiation problem has again
come to naught. The devil played a dirty trick on me.”
Unfortunately, none of the notes containing Einstein’s failed
attempts to quantize radiation have survived, and we know very
little about the mathematical structures he played with and

discarded during this period. This letter is, however, the last time
that Einstein suggests he knows how or is close to solving the
quantum puzzle for radiation. In December of 1910, again he
expresses frustration: “the riddle of radiation will not yield … the
secret remains unsolved.”
In hindsight we know that Einstein was on the wrong track in
trying to change Maxwell’s equation to encompass quanta. Einstein
was trying to do the most natural thing: nd a new set of
electromagnetic equations that contained the fundamental quantum
constant, h, either explicitly or perhaps, he thought, implicitly,
through the ratio e2/c (the electron charge squared divided by the
speed of light), which has the same units as Planck’s constant. All
the other known constants of nature at the time (except h and e)
appeared in the known laws of nature. The speed of light appears
directly in Maxwell’s equations; the gravitational constant, G, in the
Newtonian law of gravity; Boltzmann’s constant, k, in the entropy
principle, S = k log W. As these constants appear in the
fundamental laws, one can calculate from these laws consequences
that depend on the values of c or G or k.
Planck’s constant was not introduced in connection with a new
physical law; its introduction was an ad hoc insertion in the midst of
evaluating the blackbody entropy from Boltzmann’s principle.
Einstein’s hypothesis of light quanta had the same ad hoc character,
essentially inherited from Planck. That is why Einstein repeatedly
emphasized that “the so-called quantum theory of today is, indeed,
a helpful tool but … it is not a theory in the usual sense of the
word.” He naturally assumed that a quantum theory of radiation
would require a generalization of Maxwell’s equations, which would
introduce Planck’s constant but would reduce to the original
equations in contexts where no hint of quantum behavior was
observed.
But the deck was stacked against him, and his assumption was
wrong for a most subtle reason. Maxwell’s equations remain true
and unchanged in quantum theory; it is only their interpretation that
changes: they are the wave equation governing the dynamics of the

photon, in the same sense that eventually the Austrian physicist
Erwin Schrödinger would discover the quantum wave equation
describing the dynamics of the electron. But there is a decisive
di erence between the two equations: right in the middle of
Schrödinger’s equation for the electron, planted like a ag, is
Planck’s constant, just as Einstein had expected in an analogous
equation for photons. Einstein had picked the short straw. In the
radiation problem the “quantum of action,” h, was hidden in plain
sight, invisible because of the principle of relativity, Einstein’s own
creation!
If there were indeed particles of light, they could have no inertial
mass, as no massive object can reach the full speed of light.
Nonetheless, as we have seen, radiation can exert pressure (i.e., it
can transfer momentum) even though it is massless.3 The relativistic
relation between the energy, E, of a light wave and its momentum,
p, is E = pc; this relationship is embedded in Maxwell’s di erential
equations. In quantum theory, as we now understand it, photon
energy is quantized and proportional to h, but so is momentum; so the
factor h cancels in the equation relating the two. This is the essential
reason that h does not appear in Maxwell’s equations. It “should” be
there, but it cancels because photons are massless. This does not
happen for massive particles, which thus are governed by quantum
equations in which h sticks out like a sore thumb. We now believe
that photons are the only freely propagating massless particles in our
universe, so Maxwell’s equations are the only quantum equations
where h does not appear explicitly. How’s that for bad luck? If
Einstein had instead decided to focus on the mechanics of electrons
in atoms, as would Niels Bohr in a just a couple of years, perhaps
the history of physics would have been di erent. But his quixotic
search for the quantum version of Maxwell’s equations defeated
him, and he soon would lay down his lance.
By May of 1911, writing from Prague, a new note of resignation
appears in a letter to Besso. “I no longer ask whether these quanta
really exist. Nor do I try to construct them any longer, for I now
know that my brain cannot get through in this way. But I rummage

through the consequences as carefully as possible so as to learn the
range of applicability of this conception.” And then, just as Einstein
is abandoning his four-year struggle, comes the invitation:
Dear Sir,
To all appearances, we are at the moment in the midst of new
developments regarding the principles on which the classical
molecular and kinetic theory of matter has been based…. Messrs.
Planck and Einstein have demonstrated that … contradictions
disappear if one imposes certain limitations on the movement of
electrons and atoms, … but this interpretation in turn … would
necessarily and indisputably entail a vast reform of our current
fundamental theories.
To that end, the undersigned proposes to you to participate in
a “Scienti c Congress” which will … bring together in a small
meeting, several eminent scientists…. I hope that I can count on
your collaboration, and I beg to assure you, dear, Sir, of my
highest esteem.
Signed: Ernest Solvay, June 9, 1911
One can just imagine Einstein’s reaction as he read the letter:
Tell me about it, buddy. The invitation was of course too prestigious
to turn down, and he feigns great interest in his reply to Nernst a
few days later. He has been asked to give the report on the current
status of the problem of speci c heat, and he accepts. But his heart,
and his fertile scienti c imagination, are elsewhere. By August 1911
his correspondence with Laub contains the rst hints of a new
passion: “The relativistic treatment of gravitation is causing serious
di culties. I consider it probable that … the principle of the
constancy of the velocity of light holds only for spaces of constant
gravitational potential.” Within two weeks of that letter he is
corresponding with the astronomer Willem Julius about the redshift
of the wavelength of light rays from the sun due to its gravitational4
eld. In September, with the Solvay Congress looming in less than

two months, he replies irritably to a letter from Besso: “If my
answer is not … thorough, it’s because my drivel for the Brussels
congress weighs down on me.”
Thus, while the First Solvay Congress was a point of departure
for the eld, the quantum problems it addressed would henceforth
be the central problems of physics, it marked a temporary surrender
for its youngest participant. Einstein’s report was thorough and
scholarly and explained how sharply contradictory the various
modes of reasoning were, as revealed, for example, by the
uctuations in the energy of radiation: “We stand here before an
unsolved puzzle, just as in the study of thermal motion in a solid….
Who would have the audacity to give a categorical answer to these
questions? I only intended to show here how fundamental and deeprooted the di culties are in which the radiation formula enmeshes
us.” He presented no new ideas for how to get out of these
di culties; the optimism of Salzburg had dissipated.
On a personal level Einstein enjoyed the conference greatly; he
described how he was “enchanted” with the French trio of Jean
Perrin, Paul Langevin, and Madame Curie. Lorentz, whom he had
already met for the rst time earlier that year, again awed him: “H.
A. Lorentz chaired the conference with incomparable tact and
unbelievable virtuosity.” Planck’s integrity won him over: “he is a
completely honest man who shows no consideration for himself.”
But as for science, everyone there was just discovering the
forbidding territory he had been surveying for years. His nal
verdict was delivered to his old friend Besso, for whom diplomacy
was not required: “In Brussels, too, they acknowledged the failure of
the theory … but without nding a remedy. In general the Congress
… resembled the lamentations on the ruins of Jerusalem. Nothing
positive has come out it…. I did not nd it very stimulating because
I heard nothing that I had not known before.” In the aftermath he
seems to have suspected that his focus on radiation was the wrong
path, writing to Lorentz a month later, “the h-disease5 looks ever
more hopeless. Still I believe that the purely mechanical side will be the
rst to be cleared up.” In this he would be proved right.

There was one claim enunciated at Brussels that Einstein alone
of all present might have found particularly interesting and worthy
of dispute, although he would never have done so in public, because
that claim was made by Solvay himself. In the midst of his
incomprehensible lecture on “positive and negative ether” Solvay
had included the statement, “I took as my starting point Newton’s
wonderful law [of gravity], which is uncontested and therefore able
to satisfy the most rigorous scienti c mind.” In fact it was just this
law that Einstein had now begun to question seriously. By March of
1912 he wrote to a friend, “I’m working at full speed on a problem
(gravitation). You should forgive me my long silence.” In October of
1912, having returned to Zurich, he declined an invitation from
Sommerfeld to speak on quantum theory with the words, “I assure
you that I have nothing new to add to the question of quanta that
might be of any interest…. I am now working exclusively on the
gravitation problem.” Sommerfeld, who had contacted Einstein with
the speaking invitation on behalf of the famous mathematician
David Hilbert, wrote in despair to Hilbert, “My letter to Einstein
proved useless…. Apparently he is so deeply involved in the
problem of gravitation that he turns a deaf ear to all else.”
Einstein, at least temporarily, had put up a metaphorical sign
over the door to the atom: this way lies madness. He admitted as
much with a joke he told to a friend and colleague, Philipp Frank,
whom he had met during his year in Prague. Frank had quickly been
captivated by Einstein’s wit and whimsy: “his sense of humor was
readily apparent … when someone said something funny … the
laughter that welled up from the very depth of his being was one of
his characteristics which immediately attracted one’s attention.” As
Frank tells the story, “about that time Einstein began to be much
troubled by the paradoxes arising from the dual nature of light6
[wave and particle]…. his state of mind over this problem can be
described by this [the following] incident.” Einstein’s o ce in
Prague looked over a park, whose patrons had odd characteristics:
only women appeared in the morning, only men in the afternoon,
sometimes alone and talking to themselves, other times in groups

engaged in vehement discussions. The explanation for these patterns
turned out to be that the park belonged to the mental asylum of
Bohemia, whose less violent patients were allowed its use. Einstein
led Frank to his window, and then remarked playfully, “there are
the madmen who do not occupy themselves with the quantum
theory.”
1

The letter from Fischer mentioned only Einstein’s “great theoretical papers in the area of
thermodynamics” and not relativity theory, indicating the input of Nernst.
2

The Zurich Polytechnic had just been raised to the status of a technical university capable
of granting doctorates and renamed ETH Zurich.
3

In Newtonian physics the momentum of an object is its mass times its velocity (p = mv),
and would be zero for a massless object.
4

The correspondence was actually initiated by a job feeler from Julius’s University of
Utrecht, which Einstein ultimately received and turned down in favor of ETH Zurich.
5
6

Einsteinian synecdoche: Planck’s constant, h, stands for the entire quantum conundrum.

Frank was of course wrong here; Einstein had been concerned about this paradox for at
least four years prior to moving to Prague.

CHAPTER 19

A COSMIC INTERLUDE

Scienti c endeavors are quite extraordinary; often nothing is more
important than seeing where it is not advisable to expend time
and e ort…. an instinct must be developed for what is just barely
attainable upon the exertion of the utmost e ort. [My recent]
magnetic experiment, for example, could have been done by any
old lout. But general relativity is of another kind. Having actually
arrived at this goal gives me the greatest satisfaction of my life,
even though up to now not a single colleague in the eld has
recognized the depth and necessity of this path.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN, MAY 31, 1915
Having decided that a true quantum theory was not yet
attainable in 1911, even with his utmost exertion, Einstein devoted
himself for the next four years primarily to his new theory of
gravity, which arose as a natural generalization of his special theory
of relativity and is hence termed the general relativity theory. The
inspiration for his rst work in this area, the special theory, had
come from the properties of electromagnetic waves, arising from
Maxwell’s equations. Gravity played no role at all in his thinking,
and in fact prior to 1907, in contrast to his well-documented interest
in atoms, there is no evidence Einstein was particularly interested in
gravitational phenomena. Gravitational e ects were of primary
interest in astronomy, as it is only on the celestial scale that
gravitational forces dominate over electromagnetic and nuclear
forces. However, Einstein was nothing if not dogged in pursuit of
conceptual clarity. Upon enunciation of the principle of relativity,

the statement that the laws of physics should appear the same to all
observers in uniform relative motion, he quickly noted that “the
question arises whether this statement should not also be extended
to non-uniform [i.e., accelerated] motion.” When in accelerated
motion, you feel forces not present in uniform motion. For example,
when you go from zero to sixty in four seconds, you are pressed
back in your seat; you cannot say you are standing still and the
world around you is accelerating backward, because people outside
your car are not pushed forward. The conclusion that you are
“really accelerating” and they are not seems unavoidable. Thus it
appears that one can at least de ne absolute acceleration, if not
absolute velocity.
However, in 1907, Einstein got the idea that pointed the way to
a theory in which all motion, even that involving acceleration, is
relative—a general theory of relativity. The hint to his idea is
contained in a phrase used by the zero-to-sixty crowd: “pulling gs.”
The force you feel pushing you back in your seat feels sort of like
gravity; in fact, if your acceleration were constant and exactly the
same as that due to gravity at the earth’s surface (9.8 meters per
second squared, denoted by the letter g), you would “weigh” exactly
the same with respect to a scale placed in the back of your seat as
you do with a scale standing upright. Einstein surmised that the
inertial force experienced during acceleration is completely
indistinguishable from the force of gravity. It followed that a
general theory of relativity, with no special, privileged states of
motion, could perhaps be achieved if it were also combined with a
new theory of gravitation. He sketched the earliest, most primitive
outline of such a theory in 1907 but did nothing more on it until
1911, as he began to relinquish his single-minded focus on quantum
theory and the nature of radiation. For the next four years almost all
his original research papers were on the theory of gravitation, and
his few works pertaining to atoms and/or quantum phenomena
were not of a groundbreaking nature. His nal success did not come
until November of 1915, six months after his premature declaration
of success (quoted above).

This episode in his scienti c life was a departure from his earlier
modus operandi. Contrary to some depictions, Einstein had been
very interested in and aware of experiments in all his previous
work; in fact, during this very same year, 1915, he had published
his only experimental paper, an attempt to determine the origin of
atomic magnetism in collaboration with Lorentz’s son-in-law,
Wander J. de Haas.1 Moreover, ever since his student days he had
not been much excited about higher mathematics, which he
dismissed as needless erudition. He wanted to explain nature, not
impress his fellow physicists with his mathematical prowess.
General relativity changed his outlook. He quickly realized that he
would need more sophisticated mathematical tools than previously,
and his theory building was not motivated by any puzzling
experiments or even community consensus about fundamental
questions, but rather by his own conviction that a consistent
framework for physical laws must exist in which all motion is
relative. The fact that at the end of a herculean struggle he ended up
with a beautiful mathematical construction, which also predicted
and explained a few observable astronomical phenomena, created a
paradigm of supreme theoretical insight for all who followed.
Nothing quite like this had transpired before in natural science.
As early as 1919 J. J. Thomson, the British Nobel laureate.
pronounced it “one of the highest achievements of human thought.”
Quantum pioneers and Nobel laureates Paul Dirac and Max Born
went one step further: Dirac called general relativity “probably the
greatest scienti c discovery ever made,” and Born pronounced it
“the greatest feat of human thinking about nature.” Einstein himself
was transported by his breakthrough: “The theory is of
incomparable beauty,” he told his friend Zangger; to Besso he wrote,
“my boldest dreams have now come true.” The die was cast;
henceforth this achievement would overshadow everything he had
done or would do in theoretical physics, not just to the public, who
went crazy over curved space and bent light rays when news of the
theory’s con rmation emerged in 1919, but eventually to Einstein
himself. His autobiographical notes, written at his seventieth

birthday, present a view of his scienti c career in which all his
earlier work was the prelude to general relativity and all his
subsequent work owed from it. His quantum mania is barely
mentioned.
But this is the perspective of a man who knows how the story
will turn out: he knows it will end with an atomic theory he cannot
fully accept. The Einstein of 1915 was still in hot pursuit of the new
“fusion theory,” as he himself had dubbed it, in which light would
be both a particle and a wave, and Newtonian mechanics would be
replaced by a theory of particle motion that naturally incorporated
quantum discontinuity. In February of 1916 he wrote to
Sommerfeld, waxing poetic about Sommerfeld’s recent theory of
atomic spectral lines, which he said had “enchanted me. A
revelation!” even calling it, a few months later, “among my nest
experiences in physics.” By the end of May 1916, six months after
completing general relativity, he already was presenting new work
on an application of quantum theory to physical chemistry, a proof
that any chemical reaction that requires the input of light to
proceed, absorbs energy in the amount of hυ per molecular reaction.
By early July of 1916 his next great quantum breakthrough had
materialized. He published an initial report that month and was
polishing it for a more de nitive presentation on August 11, 1916,
when he wrote to Besso: “A brilliant idea has dawned on me about
radiation absorption and emission; it will interest you.” That idea
would be the foundation of the modern quantum theory of
radiation, the rst chapter in every modern textbook on the subject.
The Einstein who wrote those lines was living a very di erent
life from the expatriate professor in Prague who in 1911 had
temporarily left quantum theory to the lunatics and raised his
intellectual gaze from the atom to the cosmos. Recall that in July of
1912 the newly eminent physicist A. Einstein, father of two young
boys and husband of one increasingly unhappy spouse, had returned
to Zurich as a full professor of theoretical physics at the Poly, now
upgraded in status to the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
(ETH). The Einstein family loved Zurich and had many close friends

there, but a variety of forces were conspiring to attract Professor
Einstein to a di erent equilibrium state.
Already, two years before this, the formidable Nernst had begun
pulling the levers that would pry Einstein out of Switzerland and
into Germany. In this e ort he had gained by 1912 a powerful ally
in his colleague Fritz Haber, the assimilated German-Jewish chemist
who was responsible for the development of the ammonia extraction
process, a process that would be critical to Germany’s military
strength and, ultimately, to the agricultural revolution of the
twentieth century. In April of 1912, even before returning to take up
the post at Zurich, Einstein had visited Berlin and spoken with
Nernst, Planck, Haber, Rubens, and Warburg; and job possibilities
were already being oated. As an intellectual center of the new
quantum physics, Berlin outshone not only Zurich but any place else
on the planet as well, and this clearly interested Einstein. However,
with his famous intellectual independence, he hardly needed to
move yet again simply to improve his scienti c neighbors. But then
two new factors entered the equation.
On that very rst trip to Berlin in April of 1912 he renewed his
acquaintance with a female cousin, Elsa Einstein, whom he
remembered fondly from childhood visits. Elsa, a divorcée, three
years his senior with two daughters from her marriage, was Albert’s
cousin through both her father’s and mother’s family; but, by the
customs of the time, this would not have hindered at all an amorous
relationship between the two. Later Elsa would claim that she had
fallen in love with Albert when she knew him as a boy because of
his beautiful violin playing. She was as comfortable and familiar to
Einstein as Mileva had been di erent and intriguing. Born in the
Einstein ancestral home of Hechingen,2 she shared his Swabian
dialect and prized the Swabian value of gemütlichkeit, which
narrowly refers to a cozy domestic environment but more generally
denotes warmth, good humor, and acceptance. While
contemporaries judged her prettier than Mileva, she was not a
beauty, but shared Einstein’s stocky build and curly hair to the
extent that later in life people commented on how much they looked

alike. Einstein was drawn to her, it seems, as someone who would
understand his needs and take care of him, which in fact is exactly
what transpired.
How Elsa and Albert reconnected on that rst visit to Berlin in
April 1912 is not known in detail, but their reunion had an
immediate e ect on both. Within days of his return Elsa wrote to
Einstein at his work address (to avoid Mileva’s surveillance). While
Elsa’s letters from the time have not survived, Albert’s were lovingly
preserved by Elsa, who clearly saw the prospect of a rewarding
future life with him. In his reply to her rst letter he wrote, “I can’t
even begin to tell you how fond I have become of you during these
few days…. I am in seventh heaven when I think of our trip to
Wannsee [the forest near Berlin].” In this very rst letter he seems
already to have xed his mind on a future romantic relationship,
continuing quite boldly, “I have to have someone to love, otherwise
life is miserable. And this someone is you; you cannot do anything
about it, as I am not asking you for permission.” And, nally, he
warns her not to assume that he is unmanly because he defers to
Mileva in public: “Let me categorically assure you that I consider
myself a full- edged male. Perhaps I will sometime have the
opportunity to prove it to you.”
During the same visit to Berlin at which he kindled the
relationship with Elsa, Einstein was courted for a position in the
Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt, the laboratory at which
many of the fundamental studies on blackbody radiation had been
done. However, this position did not materialize and in any case
would not have held much attraction for Einstein. In fact he had
told Elsa in that rst letter that “the chances of my getting a call to
Berlin are, unfortunately, rather slight.” And, perhaps for this
reason, Einstein rapidly backtracked on his overture to Elsa, saying
just three weeks later, “it will not be good for the two of us as well
as for others if we form a closer attachment.” However, his
judgment on his prospects in Berlin was overly pessimistic; by July
of the next year (1913) Walther Nernst and Max Planck had traveled
to Zurich to make him an o er he could not refuse.

Unless they were independently wealthy, as in the case of
Maxwell and Lord Rayleigh, even the greatest physicists had to earn
their keep by teaching, administration, or supervision of projects of
practical utility. However, Nernst, Haber, and Planck had convinced
the Prussian authorities that Einstein would be such a jewel in their
crown that he should be an exception. He was o ered a
professorship at the University of Berlin with no teaching duties
(except by his own choice) as well as the directorship of a new
theoretical physics institute, which did not yet exist and which he
could run with as little structure as he saw t. And, nally, he was
to be elected to the august Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences as
its youngest member.3 This last honor was considered so great that
when he told the news to an esteemed older colleague at Zurich,
Aurel Stodola, it brought a “tear of joy” to Stodola’s eyes, “because
ideal justice had been meted out to somebody on this earth.”

FIGURE 19.1. Einstein playing the violin along with the daughter of his ETH colleague
Adolph Hurwitz, who is conducting, in 1913. Einstein’s triumphant return to Zurich would
be short-lived, as he was soon lured away to Berlin. ETH-Bibliothek Zurich, Image Archive.

It is not likely that Einstein cared for this honor nearly as much
as others did. Philipp Frank recounts a jest Einstein made when a
colleague at Zurich remarked that admission to the academy always
came so late in life that it no longer made the honoree happy;
Einstein replied that then he should be eligible for immediate
admission “because it would not make me happy even now.” But
while Einstein was unimpressed by such vanities, the o er of
complete intellectual freedom came at the perfect time. He was
halfway through his historic struggle with the theory of gravitation,
aware that he was on the verge of changing mankind’s view of the
universe, but not at all con dent of success. Moreover he was
closely following the developments in quantum theory, where Berlin
was the center. At the same time, he found his teaching duties at
ETH increasingly taxing, draining time from his epoch-making
research. And now the o er came to be simply left alone in Berlin to
think as he pleased! To the consternation of Mileva, he accepted the
o er.
In speaking to scienti c colleagues, Einstein always cited
freedom to focus on his research as his motivation for moving. To
Lorentz he wrote, “I couldn’t resist the temptation of a post in which
I would be free from all obligations and be able to indulge wholly in
my musings.” To Ehrenfest he spoke more plainly, “I accepted this
odd sinecure because lecturing in class was getting oddly on my
nerves, and there I won’t have to do any lecturing.” All the
perquisites for this life of untroubled scienti c contemplation were
put into place as promised by Nernst and Planck, and by April of
1914 Einstein had arrived in Berlin, traveling separately from his
family. Barely two months later Mileva and his sons had come and
gone, returned to Zurich. Mileva had “howled unceasingly” against
the move and hated the city at rst sight. Their relationship had
become frigid and hostile, and her departure began a separation
from him, which would prove permanent, although not accepted as
such for many more years. Einstein wept copiously at the train
station seeing them o and had to be supported by Haber as he
walked home. For years he bemoaned the estrangement from his

children but nonetheless quickly adapted to a new, less-encumbered
lifestyle in Berlin. Barely a year later he wrote to his old friend
Zangger, “In personal respects I have never been so at peace and
happy as now. I am living a very secluded and yet not lonely life,
thanks to the loving care of my cousin, who had drawn me to Berlin
in the rst place, of course” (italics added).
1

“Experimental Proof of the Existence of Ampere’s Molecular Currents,” by A. Einstein and
Wander J. de Haas, Koninklijke Akademie van Wettenschappen te Amsterdam, Section of
Science Proceedings, vol. 18, pp. 696–711 (1915–1916).
2

Einstein’s “certi cate of presidency” for the Olympia Academy ( gure 8.1) had labeled
him “the man of Hechingen.”
3

The nominators, Planck, Nernst, Rubens. and Warburg wrote: “The undersigned are
aware that their proposal to accept so young a scholar as a regular member of the Academy
is unusual; but they are of the opinion not only that the unusual circumstances adequately
justify the proposal, but also that the interests of the Academy really require that the
opportunity … to obtain such an extraordinary person be taken advantage of.” The
academy also took the highly unusual step of granting Einstein a generous salary for this
nominally honori c post.

CHAPTER 20

BOHR’S ATOMIC SONATA

Europe in its madness has now embarked on something incredibly
preposterous. At such times one sees to what deplorable breed of
brutes we belong. I am musing serenely along in my peaceful
meditations and feel only a mixture of pity and disgust.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN, AUGUST 19, 1914
Einstein had not only changed his domestic situation by
moving to Berlin; he had radically changed his social and political
environment. Within a month of his inaugural address at the
Prussian Academy of Sciences he found himself surrounded by a
ood of militaristic German nationalism, alone on a tiny island of
paci st universalism. The Great War had begun, and his admired
German colleagues—Nernst, Haber, and even the mild-mannered
Planck—rushed to show their devotion to the fatherland. They and
many other academics signed an ill-conceived “Appeal to the
Cultured World” denying documented German war crimes in
Belgium and asserting the unity of German culture with German
militarism. Einstein joined with a physician friend, George Nicolai,
to respond with a counter-manifesto titled “Appeal to the
Europeans” denouncing the attitude of their colleagues as
“unworthy of what until now the whole world had understood by
the word culture.” No one of consequence agreed to sign their
version. For the next four years Einstein maintained his critical
stance toward both sides in the war but mainly expressed it, as he
put it, through the Socratic method—posing questions to his peers
that others did not dare raise. Because of his intellectual stature and

his identity as an outsider he was indulged as an eccentric genius,
and su ered no major consequences (as he would later when antiSemitism joined forces with postwar nationalism).
However, his colleagues did not con ne themselves to written
expressions of support for the war e ort. Nernst, always a bit of a
self-caricature, at age fty volunteered as support sta in what was
called the Drivers Corps. He drove o in his private car to the front
just in time to participate in the rst rapid advance on Paris, getting
so far that he could see the glow of the city lights at night. When the
drive stalled and trench warfare began, he returned to Berlin and
devoted himself to developing nonlethal chemical weapons, whose
prototypes failed to impress the General Sta . Haber had fewer
scruples and focused on developing the truly deadly gas weapons for
which the Germans became renowned: chlorine, mustard gas, and
phosgene. If the General Sta had believed more strongly in these
weapons, the Germans might well have broken through the Allied
lines when they were rst deployed at Ypres and won the war.
Nernst and Planck would both lose sons in the war; Haber would
lose his wife, Clara, who committed suicide at least partly out of
disgust at her husband’s embrace of deadly invention.1 Remarkably
Einstein never spoke out against his colleagues directly and actually
defended them, saying that they were “internationally minded as
scientists” in comparison to chauvinistic nonscientists.
While Einstein often mentioned the psychological toll of the war
in his letters (“the international catastrophe weighs heavily on me”),
he repeatedly demonstrated his preternatural ability to block out the
external world and concentrate on his science. The years 1914 and
1915 were devoted to the completion of general relativity, the
monumental achievement already discussed. Within months of that
exclamation point, he had attacked the quantum problems with
renewed vigor. Something big had happened in the atomic world
during his cosmic interlude. The 1911 Solvay Congress, which had
been of little scienti c use to Einstein, had been an eye-opener for a
number of the distinguished participants from England and France,
where the early quantum theory was barely known. Chief among

them was a New Zealander, now transplanted to the physics
laboratory at the University of Manchester in England, named
Ernest Rutherford. He had been exploring experimentally the
structure of the atom, blissfully unaware of the strong evidence from
statistical physics that atoms obeyed new rules not explained by
classical mechanics and electromagnetic theory. He had already
been awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for measuring the
elementary unit of charge in the dramatic year of 1908, when
Planck’s Nobel nomination in physics was defeated owing to belated
comprehension that his quantum of action, h, threatened the
foundations of the eld. By 1913 Rutherford’s research group had
done the decisive experiments supporting the idea of a nuclear
atom: in this picture a number of light, negatively charged electrons
orbited around a localized, much heavier nucleus with the same
number of positive charges. Now one had a well-de ned model
within which classical physics could crash and burn; that was
progress.
In Rutherford’s lab at the time was a twenty-six-year-old visiting
Danish physicist, Niels Bohr. This Bohr was showing distressing
signs of preferring theory to experiment, not a popular trait in the
laboratory of “Papa” Rutherford, but fortunately his manly vigor
compensated for this weakness of character. Rutherford decided he
was an acceptable breed of the species: “Bohr is di erent. He’s a
football player.”2
Bohr in turn greatly admired Rutherford. After enduring an
unsuccessful visit to J. J. Thomson in Cambridge before moving to
Manchester, he wrote to his brother enthusiastically about the
contrast. Rutherford’s lab was “full of characters from all parts of
the world working with joy under the energetic and inspiring
in uence of the ‘great man.’ ” Rutherford himself was “a man you
can rely on; he comes regularly and enquires how things are going
and talks about the smallest details.” Rutherford communicated to
Bohr the extraordinary puzzles posed by the early quantum
concepts. As Bohr recalled, “I got a vivid account of the discussions
at the rst Solvay meeting from Rutherford in 1911, shortly after his

return from Brussels.” He immediately set about nding a way to t
Planck’s constant, h, into the Rutherford atom.
Bohr began his theorizing at just the right time. For some time
the atom had been known to be an electrically neutral object
containing negative electrons, which had been discovered by J. J.
Thomson in 1897. These electrons appeared to inhabit a region of
dimensions one hundredth of a millionth of a centimeter (10−8 cm).
The nature of the positive charge, which counterbalanced the
electron’s negative charge and made the atom neutral, was not
known in the rst decade of the twentieth century. Elaborating on a
proposal by Lord Kelvin, J. J. Thomson had introduced a “plum
pudding” model in which the positive charge was spread out
uniformly in a sphere of roughly the same dimensions as the
electrons inhabited, that is, 10−8 cm. The electrons were somehow
suspended in stationary rings within the positively charged sphere
and were the “raisins” in the pudding. Classical physics required
that the electrons be stationary (except when they were disturbed
by some external perturbation) because, according to Maxwell’s
equations, electrons orbiting in the atom would continuously radiate
their energy away, a process that was not observed. In contrast,
isolated atoms in a gas emitted light only at a few narrow
frequencies, speci c for each element. Moreover they did not do this
continuously but only intermittently or under external disturbance.
Thomson had not attended the Solvay Congress of 1911, where
the necessity of changing fundamental laws at the atomic scale was
communicated to Rutherford and others, and when he did attend
the second conference, in 1913, he was still defending his classical
atom. The distinguished continental attendees, who had been
struggling with quantum paradoxes for many years, did not sit still
for this. Lorentz interrupted his lecture to state, “The proposed
hypothesis gives rise to an … objection of a general … nature. We
can take it as established that a model in which everything happens
according to the laws of ordinary mechanics will lead to Lord
Rayleigh’s formula for the black-body radiation [the ultraviolet
catastrophe]. As the model proposed by Sir J. J. Thomson contains

nothing which is incompatible with the rules of mechanics, it is
highly improbable that we will be able to deduce from it the correct
laws of radiation.”
While Thomson was receiving this rude awakening, his former
protégé Rutherford had already established experimentally that
Thomson’s plum pudding was indigestible. In radioactive decay,
doubly ionized helium atoms, known as alpha particles, are ejected
from the decaying atom; these can be collimated into a beam that
can probe the structure of the atom. Starting in 1909, experiments
by Hans Geiger3 and Ernest Marsden, under Rutherford’s
supervision, found that alpha particles in such a beam were
occasionally knocked completely sideways by a thin foil of metal
atoms. As one might imagine from the pudding analogy, a di use
sphere of positive charge as envisioned by Thomson could never
result in such violent redirection of the alpha particle. As Rutherford
put it, it was as if one had red an artillery shell at tissue paper and
found it ricocheted back at oneself. Thus there had to be something
hard at the center of the atom, and since the electrons were known
to be light, it could only be a highly localized and relatively heavy
ball of positive charge, which he called the atomic nucleus. (Except
for hydrogen, atomic nuclei contain equally heavy neutral particles,
neutrons, with no charge, but that fact would not be established for
two more decades.)
Thus when Bohr sat down to explain the mechanics of the atom
in 1913, he knew several very important things. One could try to
picture the atom as a miniature solar system, with light, negatively
charged electrons orbiting around a localized, heavy, positively
charged nucleus. The electrons had to orbit, because if they were
ever stationary they would be attracted directly into the nucleus.
Yet they couldn’t radiate energy while they orbited, as required by
classical electrodynamics; otherwise they would eventually collapse
into the nucleus anyway. But that was not a problem; that was a
feature. He had grasped Lorentz’s point, that his theory could only
be successful if it violated some aspect of classical physics, and if it
somehow got Planck’s constant, h, into the equations. Blackbody

theory had succeeded by using classical physics where it worked
and changing the rules where it didn’t. Why not take the same
approach to the atom?
Bohr wrote his seminal paper on atomic spectra in early 1913,
having returned to Denmark from England, and he sent it to
Rutherford for his criticism. Rutherford was mightily impressed by
the conclusions but objected to its length, as well as its wordy and
ponderous style. “I really think you should abbreviate some of the
discussions to bring it into a more reasonable compass,” he wrote;
“as you know, it is the custom in England to put things very shortly
and tersely in contrast to the German method, where it appears to
be a virtue to be as long-winded as possible.” Far from being cowed
by this reaction, Bohr traveled to Manchester and fought
successfully for every single word of his manuscript. This
semantically rich but equation-poor scienti c writing style would be
a lifelong characteristic of the Dane.
Bohr begins by noting that while his mentor, Rutherford, has
established experimentally the plausibility of a “solar system” model
of the atom, “in an attempt to explain some of the properties of
matter on the basis of this atom-model we meet … with di culties
of a serious nature arising from the apparent instability of the
system of electrons [due to radiative energy loss]…. The way of
considering the problem has, however, undergone essential
alterations in recent years owing to the development of the theory
of energy radiation, and … a rmation of the new assumptions
introduced in this theory, found by experiments … such as speci c
heat, photoelectric e ect, Röntgen rays [x-rays], etc. The result …
seems to be a general acknowledgement of the inadequacy of the
classical electrodynamics in describing the behavior of systems of
atomic size.” Here, after mentioning, Einstein’s two great
predictions of experimental quantum behavior, the photoelectric
e ect and speci c heat, he cites the proceedings of the First Solvay
Congress. He continues, “Whatever the alteration of the laws of
motion of the electrons may be, it seems necessary to introduce into

[them] a quantity foreign to the classical electrodynamics, i.e.
Planck’s constant.”
He realizes he is treading in Einstein’s footsteps. “The general
importance of Planck’s theory for the discussion of the behavior of
atomic systems was originally pointed out by Einstein [he cites
Einstein’s 1905 and 1906 papers on light quanta, and his 1907
paper on speci c heats]. The considerations of Einstein have been
developed and applied to a number of di erent phenomena,
especially by Stark, Nernst, and Sommerfeld.” Note that, as with
Nernst in 1910, Einstein, not Planck, is seen as the promulgator of
the quantum atom. But unlike Einstein in the years 1908–1911,
Bohr will not try to put the constant h into Maxwell’s equations. He
will introduce it into classical mechanics by means of two standalone postulates, in a move very similar to Planck’s original
restriction ε = nhυ (which in Einstein’s hands became quantization
of vibrational energy).
So what was the problem with “Plancking” electron motion in
the atom anyway? The problem is expressed by Einstein in his rst
series of letters to Lorentz: “For me the only di culty consists in the
fact that Planck’s foundation (the introduction of the hυ-quanta)
does not apply to the elementary foundation of the theory, but only
to the special case of oscillating structures [with a single frequency].
We do not know therefore, and cannot deduce … what kind of
electrical and mechanical laws we have to introduce for the free
electron … there is no contradiction here, but only the di culty of
generalizing Planck’s approach.” As already noted, Planck had taken
the simplest possible mechanical system, a mass on a spring (what
physicists call a linear oscillator) and appended the ad hoc rule that
its energy could only be an integer times hυ, a quantization rule
with no justi cation in Newtonian physics.
The reason that a linear oscillator is so simple is that it makes a
periodic motion (going back and forth on exactly the same path)
and the frequency of this motion is independent of how far you
stretch the spring. As discussed earlier, when you stretch the spring
farther, you add more total energy to the motion; the extra energy

exactly compensates for the extra distance it must travel in one
period, so it oscillates over the longer distance in exactly the same
time, that is, with the same frequency. So for a linear oscillator the
frequency of oscillation is a constant, independent of the energy of
the oscillator, and the rule ε = nhυ determines what energies are
allowed. When a Planck oscillator emits a light quantum, hυ, it loses
one quantum of energy, now having ε = (n –1)hυ, but the frequency
of motion doesn’t change, because it is a linear oscillator. The same
frequency, υ, describes both the frequency of the electronic motion
and the frequency of the emitted light, just as one would expect in
classical electrodynamics: oscillating charges produce radiation at
their oscillation frequency.
But this single-frequency behavior of the linear oscillator is due
to its simple force law; the restoring force of the spring (which pulls
it back and forth) is proportional to the distance the spring is
stretched. The force on an electron in a nuclear atom is not of that
kind; Bohr assumed (correctly) that it was the inverse square law of
electrical attraction between oppositely charged particles. At least
for the simplest case, the hydrogen atom (one electron moving
around one proton), this force law leads to periodic orbital motion,4
but the frequency of the motion changes continuously as the energy
is changed. For example, two electrons in circular orbits of di erent
orbital radii not only have di erent “binding energies” to the
nucleus but also have di erent orbital frequencies. Since the math
involved is exactly the same as for a planet orbiting the Sun, all the
equations for how this works were well known from classical
celestial mechanics. In particular, planets farther away from the Sun
are less strongly attracted to it, have less binding energy, and hence
orbit the Sun with a longer period (lower frequency); Pluto’s year,
for instance, is 248 Earth years. Bohr was prepared to use the same
principles of classical mechanics for electron orbits; but then how
does one implement a quantum rule for the allowed energies when,
unlike for an oscillator, the frequency changes when the energy
does?

Let’s call the electron orbital frequencies f to distinguish them
from the frequencies of light the atom might emit, which we will
still call υ. By a rather tenuous argument, Bohr came up with a
surprising answer. The allowed energies for electrons orbiting the
nucleus were given by a whole number times Planck’s constant
times half the nal orbital frequency.5 Planck’s ε = nhf for
oscillators became Bohr’s ε = nhf/2, for electron orbits in hydrogen.
The unique circular orbits picked out by this rule were termed
“stationary states,” which were postulated to remain stable forever,
without radiating energy. Since, as noted, the frequencies of the
orbits themselves vary with the energy of orbit, this rule does not
lead to equally spaced energy levels, in contrast to what Planck had
found for oscillators.
In coming up with this less-than-obvious generalization of
Planck’s rule, Bohr was guided by remarkable intuition, and by a
critical observation about the spectra of light emitted from
hydrogen gas. It had been known for a very long time that the light
emitted from atomic gases does not consist of a continuous
“rainbow” of colors but instead has a few very pure colors. When
this light was focused onto an optical device called a di raction
grating, which functions essentially like a prism, the di erent colors
could be separated from one another in space and then projected
onto a screen, giving rise to narrow bands, or “spectral lines,” of
color. Since di erent elements give di erent sequences of colors
(lines), one could use such spectra to identify which elements were
emitting the light. This was, of course, of great importance for
disciplines such as physical chemistry and also for astronomy, where
it could be used to identify the elements present in distant stars. But
why certain lines appeared for a certain element, and why the lines
were spaced in certain patterns, were completely mysterious from
the point of view of fundamental physics.
In 1888 the Swedish physicist Johannes Rydberg had noted that
the frequencies of hydrogen spectral lines seemed particularly
simple: they formed a series that could be generated by a simple
arithmetic formula.6 Bohr realized that the speci c generalization of

Planck’s rule that he had come up with, combined with standard
classical formulas relating the frequency of an orbit to its energy,
would give rise to Rydberg’s spectral series. That looked extremely
promising.
But he had to add one more critical step to explain Rydberg’s
observations. Rydberg did not directly observe electron energies; he
observed the frequencies of the light emitted from the atom,
presumably as a consequence of the change of energy state of the
orbiting electron. Bohr postulated that when the electron absorbed
or emitted energy by changing its orbital state, the frequency, υ, of
the light that was emitted or absorbed was determined by the
Planck/Einstein rule: ε1 − ε2 = hυ, where ε1 is the initial energy of
the electron and ε2 is its nal energy. This assumption, combined
with his rule for quantizing electron energies described above,
implied that only certain frequencies of light could be emitted or
absorbed by hydrogen atoms, exactly those observed by Rydberg!
That was the good news. There was also bad news. With this
argument Bohr did something so radical that even Einstein, the
Swabian rebel, had found it inconceivable; Bohr disassociated the
frequency of the light emitted by the atom from the frequency at
which the electron orbited the atom. In the Bohr formula, ε1 − ε2 =
hυ, there are two electron frequencies, that of the electron in its
initial orbit and that of the electron in its nal orbit; neither of these
frequencies coincides with the frequency, υ, of the emitted
radiation! This was a pretty crazy notion to a classical physicist, for
whom light was created by the acceleration of charges and must
necessarily mirror the frequency of the charge motion. Bohr
admitted as much: “How much the above interpretation di ers from
an interpretation based on the ordinary electrodynamics is perhaps
most clearly shown by the fact that we have been forced to assume
that a system of electrons will absorb radiation of a frequency
di erent from the frequency of vibration of electrons calculated in
the ordinary way.” However, he noted, using his new rule,
“obviously, we get in this way the same expression for the kinetic
energy of an electron ejected from an atom by photo-electron e ect

as that deduced by Einstein.” So, as a nal justi cation, he relied on
exactly the experimental evidence that motivated Einstein’s lightquantum hypothesis and inaugurated the search for a new atomic
mechanics.
But Bohr’s atomic theory was hardly the new mechanics for
which Einstein had been searching. There was still no underlying
principle to replace classical mechanics, just another ad hoc
restriction on classical orbits, a variant on Planck’s desperate
hypothesis. So be it, Bohr decided; his gambit was not elegant, but it
worked! Not only did it explain the hydrogen spectrum for visible
light, which consisted of two di erent series named for their
discoverers, the Balmer and Paschen series; it also predicted a series
of ultraviolet lines that had not been observed. Unknown to Bohr,
the American physicist Theodore Lyman had already begun
detecting this series during the preceding few years, and his results,
shortly to be published, would be found to agree with the Bohr
formula. But the pièce de résistance was the application of Bohr’s
formula to puzzling astrophysical spectral lines. A new series of
spectral lines had been observed in the blue supergiant star ζ-Puppis
by the astrophysicist E. C. Pickering and subsequently produced on
earth, in helium-hydrogen mixtures, by another astrophysicist,
Alfred Fowler. These lines corresponded to every other line in the
Balmer series for hydrogen and, for want of a better explanation,
had been tentatively assigned to hydrogen. Bohr realized that these
lines were explained perfectly by his formula. All he had to do was
assume that they arose from singly ionized helium atoms in the
star’s photosphere. Singly ionized helium has only a single electron,
like hydrogen, but of course it has a larger nuclear charge and mass;
simply plugging into Bohr’s formula the new values of charge and
mass gave the observed spectral lines.
Bohr’s explanation of the Pickering-Fowler spectrum was the
clincher; the theory wasn’t just a tautology designed to t the
known hydrogen spectrum. It had predictive and explanatory
power. When he became aware of this, Einstein was mightily
impressed. Einstein’s old Zurich acquaintance, the chemist George

Hevesy, was the rst to tell him the news. He met Einstein at the
German Physical Society conference in Vienna in 1913 and, as he
wrote Rutherford, “we came to speak of Bohr’s theory, he told me
that he had once similar ideas, but did not dare to publish them.
‘Should Bohr’s theory be right, it is of the greatest importance’ [he
said]. When I told him about the Fowler spectrum the big eyes of
Einstein looked even bigger and he told me, ‘Then it is one of the
greatest discoveries.’ ” In writing to Bohr, Hevesy recounted a
further highly revealing comment from Einstein: “I told him [the
explanation of the Fowler spectrum]…. When he heard this he was
extremely astonished and told me: ‘Then the frequency of the light
does not depend at all on the frequency of the electron [italics added]
… this is an enormous achievement. The theory of Bohr must then
be right.’ ”

FIGURE 20.1. Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr in discussion, circa 1925–30. Photograph by
Paul Ehren fest, courtesy AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.

So this was the revolutionary step that Einstein, who had mused
on spectral lines as early as 1905, had not been willing to take. The

frequency of light had nothing to do with the frequency of motion of
the electron in the atom—who would have guessed? Einstein, the
originator of so many “crazy” leaps of intuition himself, could
recognize one when he saw it. What impressed him were not Bohr’s
calculations, which were simple, but the insight to guess what one
should keep and what one should drop from the laws of classical
physics. Much later he lauded Bohr’s achievement thus:
All my attempts, however, to adapt the theoretical foundation of
physics to this [quantum] knowledge failed completely. It was as
if the ground had been pulled out from under one, with no rm
foundation to be seen anywhere, upon which one could have
built. That this insecure and contradictory foundation was
su cient to enable a man of Bohr’s unique instinct and tact to
discover the major laws of the spectral lines and of the electronshells of the atoms, together with their signi cance for
chemistry, appeared to me like a miracle—and appears to me as
a miracle even today. This is the highest form of musicality in
the sphere of thought.
Inspired by the establishment of the Bohr postulates for the
atom, Einstein was able to write a crucial coda to Bohr’s
composition shortly after he returned to quantum cogitation in
1916, one that would add a new framework to the insecure
foundation of the developing quantum theory.
1

Clara was reportedly particularly disturbed by the death of Haber’s brilliant young
collaborator, Otto Sackur, who was killed in a laboratory explosion while trying to improve
gas weapons.
2

Football here refers to soccer of course. In fact Bohr was by all accounts a skilled
goalkeeper, although not the athletic equal of his brother, Harald, who became a noted
mathematician; Harald won a silver medal in soccer competing for Denmark in the 1908
Summer Olympics.
3
4

Inventor of the eponymous radiation counter.

As long as the electron is bound to the nucleus (i.e., doesn’t have enough energy to
escape from the nuclear attraction).

5

Bohr got this answer by considering the average frequency of all circular orbits starting
in nitely far away from the nucleus, where f = 0, all the way in to the nal orbit, with
frequency f. Bohr’s restriction can be alternatively phrased as the constraint that the
angular momentum of an electron in a Bohr orbit is equal to nh/2π, which is the form that
generalizes to other force laws and is emphasized in modern accounts. This idea was
expressed but not strongly emphasized in his original paper.
6

The ratios of the distances in frequency between pairs of lines corresponded to the
di erence of the inverse of the squares of integers.

CHAPTER 21

RELYING ON CHANCE

Fundamental as [the relativity theory] of Einstein has proved to
be for the development of the principles of physics, its
applications are for the present still at the very limit of the
measurable. His tackling of other questions that are at the
moment at the center of attention has proved to be much more
signi cant for applied physics. Thus he was the rst to
demonstrate the signi cance of the quantum hypothesis also for
the energy of atomic and molecular motions…. That he might
sometimes have overshot the target in his speculations, for
example in his light quantum hypothesis, should not be counted
against him too much.
—PLANCK, NERNST, RUBENS, AND
WARBURG, LETTER NOMINATING EINSTEIN
FOR THE PRUSSIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES,
JUNE 12, 1913
“Why Planck and I engaged him just as you take on a
butler, and now look what a mess he’s made of physics; one can’t
turn one’s back for a minute.” This was Nernst’s sardonic appraisal
of Einstein’s triumph with general relativity. The esteemed
professors of the Prussian Academy had not brought Einstein to
Berlin to monkey around with the law of gravity and the geometry
of space-time; they were expecting him to lead them to victory in
the race to understand the atom. Instead he had ceded the inside
rail to the Dane Niels Bohr, and his English collaborators, just as the
Great War had begun. Moreover they, along with most of the

physics community, had never accepted Einstein’s notion of a new
theory in which wave-particle duality would naturally emerge and
light would really have particulate properties.
One might have thought that Bohr’s theory would have advanced
the belief in photons. Bohr’s second postulate stated that when an
electron makes a transition between two of its allowed orbits, the
result is “the emission of homogeneous radiation, for which the
relation between the frequency and the amount of energy emitted is
the one given by Planck’s theory [ε = hυ].” If one squinted just a
little at that sentence (as indeed one often had to do with Bohr’s
writing), it sure seemed like he was saying that the atom emitted
one Einsteinian light quantum every time an electron changed its
energy state. But Bohr did not mean to say this and in fact remained
opposed to the particulate concept of light for the next twelve years.
He believed that quantum mechanics governed the atom but that
the light emitted in the transition between allowed orbits, while it
contained the xed quantum of energy, hυ, was nonetheless solely
an electromagnetic wave.
Einstein himself had been chastened by his failure to nd quanta
in a modi ed Maxwellian electrodynamics and since 1911 had
spoken of photons only sotto voce. In May of 1912 he expressed his
position to Wien: “One cannot seriously believe in the existence of
countable quanta, since the interference properties of light emitted
by a luminous point in di erent directions are not compatible with
it. Nevertheless, I still prefer the “honest” theory of quanta to the
hitherto found compromises meant as its replacements.” Einstein
here identi es a puzzle that he had been struggling with for several
years already in 1912. In classical electromagnetism a point source
of radiation (such as an atom) emits a uniform spherical wave of
light traveling outward in all directions; nonetheless if one refocuses
some of these diverging rays to a screen, they will show standard
interference patterns. Einstein and Lorentz had already agreed that
each single light quantum was capable of interfering with itself, so
such a picture suggested that light quanta from a point source must
“break up” in some manner, belying their existence as “countable

quanta.” Another issue Einstein had pondered was the phenomenon
of radioactivity, in which one or more particles is emitted from the
nucleus, apparently at a random time and in a random direction.
Already in 1911 he saw a parallel here with electromagnetic
radiation, writing to Besso, “the process of absorption [of light] …
really does have similarity with a radioactive process.” His close
friend and future Nobel laureate Otto Stern recalls how much this
problem vexed him during his Prague years: “Einstein always
wracked his brain about the law of radioactive decay. He
constructed such models.” After Bohr’s eye-opening atomic theory, it
struck him that the new picture of emission and absorption could
permit these troublesome puzzle pieces to t together.
In February of 1916 Einstein had already put general relativity
aside and begun to catch up on the quantum theory of atoms.
Sommerfeld had written Einstein in December of 1915 to ask him to
look at an improvement he had made in Bohr’s formulas that
Einstein would
nd particularly interesting. Sommerfeld had
realized that there was no need for Bohr to restrict the electrons to
circular orbits; they could also move on elliptical orbits (as do all
the planets1 in our solar system). He then used a variant on Bohr’s
approach, which he had invented, to determine the quantized
energies of the allowed orbits.2 He found a more general formula
than Bohr’s that initially gave the same results for the hydrogen
spectra. But in his new approach he was able to take into account an
additional e ect that Bohr could not. Einstein’s special relativity
theory predicts that the measured mass of an electron will increase
with increasing velocity. Electrons whizzing around the nucleus
were calculated to be moving at a signi cant fraction of the speed of
light, and so this increase in mass should have a measurable e ect
on the electron’s orbital frequency. Including this e ect, as
Sommerfeld now had done, caused the spectral lines in the
hydrogen series to split into closely spaced groups of lines (“ ne
structures”), their number depending on the nal state of the
electron after light has been emitted. Sommerfeld wondered in his
letter to Einstein whether the newly minted general theory of

relativity would a ect his calculations, but Einstein assured him that
these e ects were too small to matter in this context. The “ nestructure” e ect had been previously seen and, just at that time, had
been measured carefully by the noted German spectroscopist
Friedrich Paschen (after whom one of the original hydrogen series
was named). In late December of 1915 he wrote to Sommerfeld,
“My measurements … agree everywhere most beautifully with your
ne structures.” The experimentalist was so delighted by this
transformation of an experimental anomaly into an important
discovery that he is reported to have loudly exclaimed, “Now I
believe in relativity theory!”
It was this beautiful marriage of Bohr’s atomic quantum theory
and relativity principles that so impressed Einstein, once he had
digested it; this is the work that in February of 1916 he called “a
revelation” in an ecstatic letter to Sommerfeld. Later, in August, in
the midst of his own work, inspired by Bohr’s theory, he wrote
Sommerfeld again to say, “your spectral analyses are among my
nest experiences in physics. It is just through them that Bohr’s idea
becomes entirely convincing. If only I knew which little screws the
Lord is adjusting there!” By then he had already shown, in a paper
submitted on July 17, that Bohr’s single postulate, that electrons
make transitions between allowed stationary energy states via
absorption and emission of radiation of energy hυ, had remarkable
implications.
In this rst paper of 1916, titled “Emission and Absorption of
Radiation in Quantum Theory,” he returns to the theme he rst
expounded in 1909, that Planck’s derivation of the blackbody law is
contradictory because it uses classical electrodynamics to relate the
mean energy of an oscillator to the energy density of the radiation
eld but then departs from classical physics to calculate this mean
energy according to a quantum prescription. He again praises
Planck’s courage to leap into the unknown—” his derivation was of
unparalleled boldness—but adds, “however it remains unsatisfactory
that the electromagnetic-mechanical analysis [used] is incompatible
with quantum theory.” He continues: “Since Bohr’s theory of spectra

has achieved its great successes, it seems no longer doubtful that the
basic idea of quantum theory must be maintained.” In the interests
of consistency, he says, Planck’s classical assumptions must be
“replaced by quantum-theoretical contemplations on the interaction
between matter and radiation. In this endeavor I feel galvanized by
the following consideration, which is attractive both for its
simplicity and generality.”
The simple, general consideration he mentions ows from the
concept of thermal equilibrium, which we have encountered earlier.
The blackbody law holds for radiation in contact with matter, so
that the entire system (radiation + matter) has settled into the most
probable thermodynamic state. In the thermal equilibrium state the
entropy of the system is at its maximum value, its temperature is no
longer changing, and the average energy of both the radiation and
the matter is not changing in time.3 But since the matter and
radiation are continually exchanging energy, this state of
equilibrium is not to be conceived of as the absence of interaction
but rather as continually compensating change. One can imagine the
two systems (matter and radiation) as two swimming pools
connected by pipes, so that water is owing from one pool into the
other through certain pipes and being pumped back into the rst
pool through other pipes, and on average the level of water [energy]
in each pool does not change.
Following Bohr, Einstein can now be more precise about the
nature of this dynamical equilibrium state. He assumes the matter in
contact with radiation is a gas of molecules with discrete, quantized
energy levels, Bohr’s stationary states. His argument is, however, so
general that he never needs to assign speci c values to the allowed
energies: it is enough that they exist. Thus his reasoning becomes
independent of the details of Bohr’s method for calculating atomic
energy levels. Energy is then exchanged between the molecules and
the radiation eld according to the Bohr prescription. If a molecule
has any energy greater than its minimum energy state (called the
“ground state”), then it can either emit radiation of the appropriate
energy, hυ1, so as to drop down to a lower energy state, or absorb

radiation energy of another speci c frequency, hυ2, and jump up to
a higher energy state. In order for equilibrium to be maintained,
these processes of emission and absorption of energy from the
radiation must balance out on average; the same amount of energy
must ow into the molecule as out. In fact, Einstein points out, not
only must the energy ow balance out overall; the exchange of
energy must balance out independently for each pair of molecular
levels. For each such pair “upward transitions” (absorption) must
equal “downward transitions” (emission) or the system could not
maintain its equilibrium.
So far so good; the logic and math are so simple he can hardly
have made a mistake, but he also can hardly have gained much
deductive power. Then, a crucial insight: “We shall distinguish here
two types of transitions.” When the molecule is in any of its higherenergy, “excited” states, even if there is no radiation at all present, he
assumes that there is still some chance that it will emit radiation
“without external in uence. One can hardly imagine it to be other
than similar to radioactive reactions.” What a leap! Radioactive
decay was a mysterious nuclear phenomenon that appeared to be
completely random. A radioactive substance has a certain half-life,
that is, the period of time during which on average half of the nuclei
emit radioactive particles. But for any speci c nucleus all one could
say was that the probability was one-half that it would not decay in
one half-life and one-fourth that it wouldn’t decay in two, etcetera.
The actual time and direction of decay was (and is still)
unpredictable. Now Einstein is claiming that at least some of the
events in which atoms emit light are just like this, are what we now
call “spontaneous emission” events, and he writes down exactly the
same mathematical rule for the number of spontaneous emission
events per unit time as for radioactive decay.
He then considers other emission events of a more conventional
sort, which we now call “stimulated emission”; the number of these
events depends on the amount of radiation that is already present,
which means that in equilibrium this number will be proportional to
the blackbody radiation density. These events would have been

more familiar to his readers because in classical electrodynamics
one pictures the radiation eld as “driving” or “being driven by” the
electron charges in the atom, increasing or decreasing the amount of
energy contained in the electron’s orbital motion. When the
radiation eld subtracts energy from the electrons, we have
“stimulated emission”; when it adds energy to the electrons, we
have absorption. Whew, at least some of this sounds familiar, but …
he completely throws out the classical method of calculating
absorption and emission. Instead he treats these processes as random
too.
Now all he has to do is balance out the various processes; the
energy lost by the molecules in spontaneous and stimulated
emission must on average equal that gained by absorption. By one
last sleight of hand he relates the rate of stimulated emission to that
of absorption, simplifying the equation of balance. Two more lines
of algebra and, Mein Gott, he has derived Planck’s radiation law!
Einstein has ingeniously bypassed all the complicated counting and
gone straight to the answer. He can’t resist giving himself a little pat
on the back: “The simplicity of the hypotheses, the generality with
which the analysis can be carried out so e ortlessly, and the natural
connection to Planck’s linear oscillator … seem to make it highly
probable that these are the basic traits of a future theoretical
representation.” In his jubilant letter to Besso a few weeks later he is
even more e usive: “A brilliant idea has dawned on me about
radiation absorption and emission…. An astonishingly simple
derivation, I should say the derivation of Planck’s formula. A
thoroughly quantized a air.”
Einstein was correct; his approach has become the derivation of
Planck’s formula. It is completely valid within the modern theory of
quantum mechanics and electrodynamics and is in fact the
reasoning still used in the majority of textbooks. Einstein introduced
two unknown constants of proportionality (one for the rate of
spontaneous emission, denoted by A, and one for the rate of
stimulated emission, denoted by B), and then used additional
arguments to replace them with known constants. These new

fundamental quantities can be calculated directly in the modern
theory, but in homage to the master are still labeled the “Einstein A
and B coe cients.”
Einstein did not, however, rest on his laurels. Rederiving
Planck’s law in a purely quantum framework was progress, but it
did not in itself clarify the basic question of the existence of light
quanta. He was still hunting for the resolution of the “spherical
wave paradox,” that a classical point source emits a uniformly
expanding spherical wave front, like the ripples a rock makes when
dropped into a pond. Such waves seemed to rule out
conceptualizing atomic emission as the release of a localized particle
of light, which ies out in a particular direction. It was hard to
visualize dropping a rock in a pond and having a single bump of
water move out in a speci c direction. However, it wasn’t obvious
that single atoms really behaved like classical point sources; maybe,
he thought, the classical viewpoint was just wrong. Perhaps real
atomic emission was a directed process, emitting “bumps” of light in
speci c directions; only when there were many atoms randomly
emitting in all directions (or one emitting repeatedly) would it
appear spherical.
A few weeks after his rst 1916 paper Einstein realized, to his
delight, that his new hypotheses of quantum emission allowed him
to prove just this fact, and he eagerly drafted a second paper
containing this demonstration. When he wrote to Besso on August
11, crowing about having found “the derivation,” he added, “I am
writing the paper4 right now.” In a follow-up letter to Besso two
weeks later he added, “it can be demonstrated convincingly that the
elementary processes of emission and absorption are directed
processes.”
So what was the new insight that so excited him? Einstein had
realized that he could return yet again to the well that had yielded
the theory of Brownian motion of particles in suspension and of
radiation energy uctuations. In this famous second quantum paper
of 1916, titled “On the Quantum Theory of Radiation,” he reviews
his elegant new derivation of Planck’s law, stating, “this derivation

deserves attention not only because of its simplicity, but especially
because it seems to clarify somewhat the still unclear process of
emission and absorption of radiation by matter.” Now, he says, we
must go beyond just considerations of energy exchange. “The
question arises: does the molecule receive an impulse (i.e. a push in a
speci c direction) when it absorbs or emits the energy, hυ? … It
turns out that we arrive at a theory which is free of contradictions, only
if we interpret those elementary processes as completely directed
processes [italics in the original]. Herein lies the main result of the
following considerations.”
We have already seen that radiation exerts pressure even in
classical electrodynamics and thus can push on matter, that is,
transfer momentum to matter. Einstein had used this fact in his
Salzburg “sliding mirror” thought experiment. The e ect is similar
to the recoil that occurs if you re a gun; a light wave emitted in a
speci c direction causes the emitting atom to recoil in the opposite
direction. Similarly, the analogue of absorption of light waves by an
atom is the unfortunate process of “absorbing” an incoming bullet,
which among the less problematic of its e ects causes the
“absorber” to be pushed in the direction of motion of the bullet.
However, if the atom emitted a spherical light wave, the recoil
pressure would be equal in all directions and no net momentum
would be transferred. One can picture this by imagining a platoon of
soldiers on a raft. If they all line up and re their ri es in the same
direction, then the recoil pushes the raft strongly in the opposite
direction, but if they form a circle and re outward at the same
time, the raft will not move. (They could also form a circle and all
re inward, and again the raft would not move, but that would have
other e ects.) So the consequences of directed as opposed to
undirected (spherical) emission are di erent, and in the process of
energy exchange between molecules and radiation that Einstein is
discussing, di erent motions of the molecules occur, depending on
whether one assumes the emission and absorption is directed or
undirected (“isotropic”).

To prove that each molecular interaction with radiation is a
directed process, he makes the following argument. Imagine a gas
molecule moving around in an enclosure lled with radiation, both
of which are at the same temperature, T (this is the condition for
thermal equilibrium). For the radiation this means that its energy
density will be described by a universal radiation law, which
depends on T and on the frequency, υ. Einstein is not here assuming
that this law is given by the (now) well-known Planck formula; his
goal here is to derive the Planck law in a new way, based on Bohr’s
quantum atom and general considerations from statistical physics.
In this e ort he assumes that the atoms in the gas have a kinetic
energy given by our old friend the equipartition theorem, which he
knew failed for the vibrational energy of molecules but was well
con rmed for the energy associated with the free motion of atoms in
a gas.5
So our equally partitioned gas molecules are gliding along with
the average kinetic energy 3kT/2, but their motion is not free of all
forces. The presence of all that radiation generates a kind of
frictional force, due to the Doppler e ect. The Doppler e ect, which
is familiar for sound waves, is the observed change in frequency
(pitch) that occurs when a sound source is moving toward or away
from the receiver: when moving toward, its pitch is measured to be
higher than when at rest, and similarly it is found to be lower when
the sound source is moving away. The same e ect occurs for light
waves: when you move toward them their frequency increases, and
when away from them it decreases. Actually the details are a bit
di erent for light because, unlike sound, it always is measured to
move at c, but Einstein had worked out the formulas for this while
banishing the ether way back in the miracle year of 1905.
Why does this e ect cause friction? Imagine a situation where
water waves of equal frequency are being generated in opposite
directions at two ends of a swimming pool and you are standing in
the middle, being bu eted forward and backward by those waves
from each side. If you stand still, then on average you get an equal
number of forward and backward shoves as the waves hit you, and

you are not, on average, pushed toward either end of the pool.
However, if you move at some reasonable speed (compared with the
speed of the waves) toward one end, then you hit the incoming
waves from that end more frequently than the waves generated
behind you at the opposite end. This is the Doppler e ect in a very
concrete form: you are moving in a medium in which waves are also
moving, such that you encounter more crests (at a higher frequency)
when you move against the direction of wave propagation, and at a
lower frequency when you move in the same direction as the waves.
In this case the visceral e ect is that you get knocked backward
more than you get knocked forward, and you feel an e ective force
impeding your motion toward the end of the pool you are
approaching. But if you turn around and start walking toward the
other end, exactly the same thing happens, except now the force is
pointing in the opposite direction; that is, it behaves like friction,
slowing you down no matter which direction you go. It takes
Einstein a dense three pages of algebra to work out the exact
mathematical formula for this frictional force, but this is the
essential idea.6
But this is not the only force acting on the molecule; it cannot
be, because if it were, over time the radiation eld would extract all
the kinetic energy from the molecules, leaving them at absolute zero
temperature. (In our pool analogy, the walker gets too tired to walk
against the current and just stands still.) Again we would have a
version of the ultraviolet catastrophe. But Einstein knows how
nature avoids this. The previous reasoning assumed that the
absorption events occur in a perfectly regular sequence, whereas in
actuality the molecule is being randomly bu eted by photons at
irregular intervals, so that in any short interval it gets a net kick
from the radiation that can push it in either direction, forward or
backward. Einstein calculates the magnitude of this uctuating force.
And then he assumes that these two forces, the frictional one and
the uctuating one, must on average balance, precisely to avert the
unobserved cooling of matter by radiation. But this balance
equation depends on the mathematical form of the radiation

distribution law, the infamous universal function ρ(υ, T). With great
relish, Einstein shows that Planck’s law, and only Planck’s law, will
make the two forces cancel each other on average.
But central to all of Einstein’s reasoning is that each emission
and absorption event is a directed process. “If we were to modify one
of our postulates about momenta [forces], a violation of the [force
balance] equation would be the consequence…. To agree with this
equation—which is demanded by the theory of heat—in a way other
than by our assumptions seems hardly possible.” He concludes, “If a
molecule su ers a loss of energy in the amount hυ … then this
process is a directional one. There is no emission of radiation in the
form of spherical waves.”
Not only has Einstein resolved a paradox in his own mind; he
also has changed the nature of the evolving quantum theory.
Werner Heisenberg, one of the founders of modern quantum
mechanics, has pointed out that “[Einstein] himself, in his paper of
[1917], … introduced such statistical concepts [into quantum
theory].” Pascual Jordan, a key collaborator of Heisenberg’s,
described Einstein’s paper as among the most important to in uence
the development of modern physics. From that point on, random,
acausal processes would be integral to the theory. This was not a
concept contained in the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory of the atom; it
was Einstein who let this unwelcome genie out of the bottle. He
would come to regret it.
He continues: “the molecule su ers a recoil … during this
elementary process of emission of radiation; the direction of the
recoil is, in the present state of theory, determined by ‘chance’ …
the establishment of a quantumlike theory of radiation [appears]
almost unavoidable. The weakness of the theory is … that it does
not bring us closer to a link-up with the wave theory … [and] also
leaves the time of occurrence and direction of the elementary
processes a matter of ‘chance.’ Nevertheless, I fully trust in the
reliability of the road taken [italics added].”
Einstein was con dent of his results not just because of the
simplicity and elegance of the logic; he now believed he had

attained the long-sought proof that light quanta were as “real” as
any other elementary particles, not just a manner of speaking about
the interaction of radiation with matter, as maintained by Planck,
Lorentz, and others. He proclaimed as much in his next letter to
Besso: “any such elementary process is an entirely directed process.
Thus the light quanta are as good as established.”
1

Circular orbits are allowed by classical mechanics but require a speci c relationship
between a planet’s orbital energy and its angular momentum, which never is precisely
satis ed when a planet forms out of primordial matter. In our solar system, however,
planetary orbits are quite close to being circular.
2

This approach is now called Bohr-Sommerfeld-Wilson quantization; it will be discussed
further below.
3

Recall that Jeans’s discredited explanation for the blackbody radiation observations was
based on the hypothesis that matter and thermal radiation were not in thermal equilibrium
at high frequencies. Now there was general agreement that this was incorrect, and Einstein
could base his new work on the assumption of equilibrium without fear of such criticism.
4

This second paper did not become available until 1917 and is the one usually cited and
discussed, so it is not widely appreciated that the key ideas were found between May and
August of 1916, only six to nine months after the completion of general relativity.
5

Eight years later Einstein would be the rst to discover that the equipartition theorem
can break down even for an atomic gas (see chapter 25), but those e ects require such low
temperatures that they would not become observable until the end of the twentieth
century. Moreover, this fact does not invalidate the argument he is making in the current
work.
6

The analogy here is not perfect, because there is no ether in which light waves move, but
as noted, there is a relativistic version of the Doppler e ect which still leads to a frictional
force on the gas.

CHAPTER 22

CHAOTIC GHOSTS

“I have rmly decided to bite the dust with a minimum of
medical assistance when my time has come, and up to then to sin to
my wicked heart’s desire. Diet: smoke like a chimney, work like a
horse, eat without thinking and choosing, go for walks only in really
pleasant company, and thus only rarely, unfortunately, sleep
irregularly, etc.” This was Einstein’s cheeky pronouncement to Elsa
Einstein back in August 1913, before his arrival in Berlin and the
monumental labors that occupied him between then and the
completion of his new work on thermal radiation in 1916. Many
historians regard the period of November 1915 to February of 1917
as Einstein’s second miraculous phase. During this period he
produced fteen papers, including the nal form of the theory of
general relativity, its rst extensions into cosmology, as well as the
next conceptual pillar in the emerging quantum theory, the ideas of
spontaneous emission, intrinsic randomness, and the marriage of the
Bohr atom with the Planck law, implying the reality of photons. And
all this was accomplished in the midst of wartime and the steadily
increasing hardship of daily life as hostilities dragged on and
Germany’s prospects dimmed. By early 1917 an exhausted and ill
Einstein would have to reconsider how seriously he intended to
ignore the demands of his body.
The winter of 1916, in which Einstein returned to quantum
theory with renewed intensity, became known as the “turnip
winter” in Berlin as the lowly turnip was fashioned into all manner
of absent foodstu s: bread, cake, co ee, and even something
purporting to be “turnip beer.” The British were blockading food
shipments, and as a result during that year of 1916 an estimated

120,000 Germans died from malnutrition. In February of 1917
Einstein, along with the rest of Berlin, was su ering through an
unusually frigid winter, during which he fell ill with liver and
bladder ailments that reached life-threatening severity, causing him
to lose over fty pounds in two months. Einstein had not su ered
major privations during these years, thanks to packages of supplies
sent to him by his friend Zangger in Switzerland and his relatives in
southern Germany, so his illness was due to mainly to overwork,
poor eating habits, and a chronically troubling digestive system,
which Mileva referred to as his “famous complaint.” Having only
just presented his new work on cosmology to the Prussian Academy
on February 6, 1917, he took to his bed and on the fourteenth wrote
to Paul Ehrenfest in Leiden canceling his planned visit to Holland. “I
am quite in rm from a liver condition,” he explained, “which
imposes on me a very quiet lifestyle and the strictest diet and
regimen.” Two months later he wrote to Lorentz, “I have not been
working much at all, and that under ideal circumstances.” By May
he was singing a di erent tune than the exuberant overture he had
sent to Elsa four years earlier. He told Besso he had resisted the
doctor’s order to go for a “spa cure,” saying he could not “raise the
necessary superstition”; but, he continued, “I am committing myself
to do everything else—which is unbelievable—to abstain from
drinking, etc., in short to perform the rites of medicine loyally and
piously.”
Having failed in a rst attempt to obtain a divorce from Mileva,
Einstein had maintained until this period a certain distance from his
cousin Elsa, no longer being so eager to jump into a second
marriage as in the heady early days of 1913. In the midst of his
acute illness he would still write to Zangger, “I have come to know
the mutability of all human relationships and have learned how to
insulate myself against heat and cold, so the temperature is quite
steadily balanced.” But Elsa now took the lead in nursing him back
to health and regulating his convalescence; by the end of the
summer of 1917 she had procured for him the apartment next to
hers at Haberland Strasse 5 and had even moved his things into it

while he was away traveling. By December he could report to
Zangger, “my health is quite fair now…. I have gained four pounds
since the summer, thanks to Elsa’s good care. She cooks everything
for me herself, as this has proved necessary.” However, by January
he was bedridden again for six weeks and did not feel fully healthy
again until the following summer, despite “Elsa indefatigably
cooking” his “chicken feed.” It was in that summer that Einstein
nally received the consent to a divorce from Mileva, with its
famous stipulation that she would receive the proceeds of his
inevitable Nobel Prize (should he survive long enough to receive it).
By the following June (1919), after the legal formalities had been
concluded, Einstein would nally marry Elsa and ful ll her longheld desire to become Mrs. Albert Einstein. She would be a steady,
reliable presence in his life for the next two decades but never the
romantic companion he had imagined in his early love letters,
written before actually moving to Berlin.

FIGURE 22.1. Watercolor of Einstein and Paul Ehrenfest playing duets in Leiden during
one of Einstein’s periodic visits. Original watercolor by Maryke Kamerlingh-Onnes,
courtesy AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.

Einstein’s health problems, beginning in February 1917 and
continuing well into 1918, along with the complex and draining
personal issues of divorce and remarriage, made these two years less
scienti cally productive than the previous two had been. He
continued to work on elaborations and popularizations of general
relativity, but one senses that quantum theory and the new atomic
mechanics remained paramount in his research ambitions. In March
of 1917, while still too ill to do much, he wrote to Besso referring to
his new paper on thermal radiation, which had only recently been
published despite its provenance nine months earlier. “The quantum

paper I sent out has led me back to the view of the spatially
quantum-like nature of radiation energy. But I have the feeling that
the actual crux of the problem posed to us by the eternal enigmagiver is not yet understood absolutely. Shall we live to see the
redeeming idea?”
The very next day he wrote to Zangger bemoaning his health and
his lack of intellectual momentum: “Scienti c life has dozed o ,
more or less; nothing is going on in my head either. Relativity is
complete, in principle, and as for the rest, the slightly modi ed
saying applies: … what he can do he does not want; and what he
wants he cannot do.” Coming on the heels of his proclamation about
the quantum enigma to Besso, his self-appraisal seems clear: what
he wants most at the moment is to truly understand what is going
on with atoms and their interaction with light.
Following his “perfectly quantic” derivation of the Planck law,
Einstein’s period of vacillation on the reality of light quanta, begun
in 1911, was over. He was convinced that light quanta were fulledged particles, which were localized in space, moved along
directed trajectories, and carried momentum as well as energy. This
conviction simply renewed the challenge of how to reconcile their
reality with the interference properties exhibited by electromagnetic
radiation, which seemed to require that light extend over large
regions of space. While no idea had arisen, either from him or from
the expanding community of quantum physicists, for a new
mathematical theory of light that could encompass these two
con icting aspects, around this time Einstein began to develop a
conceptual framework that could serve as a stopgap measure on the
way to a fuller theory.
He hypothesized that light is emitted in a twofold process. While
a guiding wave obeying the classical Maxwell equations is
generated, at the same time some number of localized light quanta
are ejected from the atom in speci c directions, carrying all the
energy. He mentions this idea brie y in a letter to Sommerfeld: “I
am convinced that besides the directed energetic process, a kind of
spherical wave is emitted, because of the possibility of interference

for large-aperture angles. But … I am not convinced that what is
being emitted immediately (the directed process) has an oscillatory
character.” He apparently had lengthy exchanges with Ehrenfest and
Lorentz detailing his views, although he neither published nor spoke
publicly of them. Lorentz himself included them (with credit to
Einstein) in lectures at Caltech in 1922, and a letter from Lorentz to
Einstein in November of 1921 survives, in which he recapitulates
Einstein’s proposal.
Basic idea: … Upon the emission of light there are two sorts of
radiation. They are:
1. An interference radiation, which occurs according to the
normal laws of optics but does not transmit any energy….
Consequently, they themselves cannot be observed; they just
show the way for the energetic radiation. It is like a dead pattern
that only comes to life through the energetic radiation.
2. The energetic radiation. It is composed of indivisible
quanta of [energy] hυ. Their path is given by the (vanishingly
small) ow of energy from the interference radiation, and
therefore they can never reach a spot where this ow is zero….
full interference radiation is formed [even if] … only a single
quantum is emitted, which thus also can reach the receiving
screen at only one spot. But this elementary instance is repeated
countless times…. The various quanta now distribute themselves
statistically … [so] that their average number at each point on
the screen is proportional to the intensity of the incident
interference radiation there. In this way the observed
interference phenomenon is formed, consistent with the classical
theory.
Einstein had realized that making sense of the behavior of light
requires that that we describe radiation by an extended eld or
disturbance, which would determine the measurement of energy
transfer at speci c points in space, while at the same time the
energy transfer would itself be composed of localized, and
quantized, units. He came up with the picturesque name of “ghost

elds” (Gespensterfeld) for his guiding disturbance, and it seemed
that he was inclined to regard the particulate quanta as the “real”
things while the extended, wavelike entity was relegated to a
secondary, spectral existence. Nonetheless he took the idea quite
seriously, and from 1918 on discussed it widely, so that not just
Einstein’s inner circle of con dants knew of it but also young
students, such as Eugene Wigner,1 who recalled that Einstein was
“quite fond of it.” Moreover, according to Lorentz, Einstein also
foresaw that the ghost
eld would be used to determine
probabilities for the light quanta. Continuing his description of
Einstein’s idea, he states: “It has to be assumed that at each
re ection and di raction, whenever an incident light beam is split
into two or more beams, the probability that a light quantum takes
one or the other path is proportional to the intensities of the
motions of light along these various paths, calculated according to the
classical laws” (italics added). “Classical laws” here refers to
Maxwell’s equations, which determine the re ection and di raction
of electromagnetic waves, and hence determine the probability that
the quanta will go one way or the other. For individual photons, it
seems, there are no deterministic laws of motion; only the properties
of the guiding eld are set by deterministic laws. These two ideas—
that quantum particles are guided by an extended eld, which
allows them to “interfere with themselves,” and that this extended
eld obeys de nite laws but doesn’t determine the fate of individual
quanta—are key concepts in the modern quantum theory of
radiation (and of matter). Usually they are attributed to Max Born,
who applied them rst to electrons, but he always credited Einstein
as their source, even on the Nobel podium in Stockholm.
In 1917, at the same time as Einstein was beginning to develop
his concept of “ghost elds” for quanta of light and trying not to
give up the ghost himself from his various ailments, he somehow
mustered the energy to look at the other side of the quantum
dilemma: the quantum theory of atoms and electrons. Einstein had
begun his work on quantum theory treating light and thermal
radiation, but by 1907 had realized that Planck’s law required that

atoms and molecules must also obey a non-Newtonian mechanics,
since their vibrational energy was necessarily quantized. At that
time he chose to pursue a revised theory of radiation that would
contain quanta of light, only to set the project aside in frustration in
1911. Instead it was Bohr who took the next step in atomic
mechanics, in 1913, with his quantized electron orbits, followed
closely by the elaborations of his theory due to Arnold Sommerfeld
in 1915 that so impressed Einstein. Until the spring of 1917, in
twelve years of work, Einstein had never proposed an equation to
describe the quantum behavior of electrons, the key to
understanding the atom. Rather remarkably, he took up exactly this
challenge during his convalescence in March and April of 1917. His
work would uncover a surprising de cit in the Bohr-Sommerfeld
version of quantum theory.
The early version of the quantum theory of matter, which Bohr
and Sommerfeld pioneered (and which is now known as the “old
quantum theory”), had overcome the
rst major hurdle in
generalizing the Planck-Einstein restriction that energy is quantized
on the molecular scale. As we saw earlier, Planck and Einstein had
imposed this restriction only on the simplest type of periodic
motion, linear harmonic oscillation, whereas Bohr had generalized it
through rather laborious arguments to the periodic motion of an
electron “orbiting” the nucleus of the atom. Sommerfeld had
realized that Bohr’s prescription amounted to a more general rule
than Planck’s ε = nhυ, but that the quantity actually quantized, both
in electron orbits and in molecular vibrations, was the action.
Yes, that “action.” Recall how Herr Planck always referred to his
constant, h, as the “quantum of action.” “Action” is a technical term
in classical mechanics; it refers to a mathematical quantity that was
introduced in the nineteenth century as a convenient and powerful
way to think about any particle trajectory that obeys Newton’s laws.
The “action of a trajectory” is a number that physicists can
calculate, but its meaning is not as intuitive and familiar as the
concepts of mass, momentum, and energy introduced by Newton.
Roughly it corresponds to the minimum amount of time that a

particle can take in going from point A to point B, given the forces it
experiences. Somewhat miraculously, the actual trajectory a
Newtonian particle follows according to F = ma manages to
minimize this global measure, as if the particle had planned its path
in advance. You can actually throw away Newton’s laws and do all
of classical mechanics just based on this “principle of least action.”
And just like other quantities in classical mechanics, such as
energy, action is also a continuously varying quantity, so there was
no obvious way to break it up into smallest units. No way, that is,
until the discovery of Planck’s constant. Planck’s constant is the rst
known fundamental physical constant that has the same units as
action, the units of length times momentum. If I want to cut a rope
into one-, two-, and three-foot sections, I need a ruler to measure
this out; I could use this ruler to “quantize” the lengths of rope.
Similarly, Sommerfeld had realized that Planck’s constant was the
natural “ruler” for quantizing periodic trajectories; the action along
each trajectory had to be a whole number times h. You could throw
out all the classically allowed electron orbits in the atom that didn’t
have action divisible by h with no remainder. For some reason, they
are not allowed. This rule didn’t explain why microscopic motion
was quantized in a more fundamental sense than Planck’s original
hypothesis, but it allowed the quantum theory to describe a much
wider range of motions than just simple harmonic oscillation. In
particular Sommerfeld had been able to add elliptical electron orbits
to Bohr’s simple circular orbits, and even include the e ect of
relativity on the orbital energy as the electron whizzed by the
nucleus. In fact this approach would occupy the community for the
next seven years as more and more elaborate models were made for
quantized orbits in the atom.
Einstein was intrigued enough by the elegance of Sommerfeld’s
method that immediately after nishing his new radiation theory,
he turned his attention to it. But soon he would realize that there
was a problem with this new theory of quantized actions, one that
only he recognized, and which he set out to address while he was
still barely o life support in early spring 1917.

The rst clear indication of his new perspective comes in a letter
to Besso on April 29, 1917: “yesterday I presented a little thing on
the Sommerfeld-Epstein2 formulation of quantum theory before the
thinned ranks of our Phys. Society. I want to write it up in the next
few days.” By May 11 he was ready to present the nished product
to the German Physical Society, a paper titled “On the Quantum
Theorem of Sommerfeld and Epstein.”
Einstein was motivated to write this paper by a core principle of
his relativity theory: the laws of physics should not depend on the
reference system of the observer or, in the case of the atom, on the
choice of a coordinate system for describing electron orbits. He
begins his paper by praising the Sommerfeld approach but then says
“it still remains unsatisfying that one has to depend on [a speci c
choice of the coordinate system], because this probably has nothing
to do with the quantum problem, per se.”
Einstein was searching for a more general statement of the
principle of quantizing action. And, armed with a much more
advanced set of mathematical tools than he possessed before his
development of general relativity theory, he found one: topological
invariance. Topology is the branch of mathematics that studies the
properties of objects that remain unchanged when the objects can
be deformed continuously to another shape, but without breaking
anything, so that the object retains the same number of “holes.” In
topology a doughnut and a co ee cup are considered to be the same
shape, because the handle of the cup corresponds to the hole in the
doughnut and you could imagine taking the rest of the cup (if it
were malleable) and squeezing it smoothly around the handle
without ever breaking o a piece until it molded into a doughnut
shape. In modern physics topological invariants have been found to
play critical roles in many fundamental theories, but none had been
found prior to Einstein’s 1917 work. In a tour de force, Einstein, was
able to show in a few short pages that the Bohr-Sommerfeld rule can
be written in a manner that depends only on topological properties
of the electron trajectories, essentially on how these orbits “wrap
back” on themselves after each period of the motion. Since it is a

topological property, it doesn’t change if you rotate or deform the
system, and hence it doesn’t depend on any particular coordinate
system.
So it looks like Einstein is satis ed that he has rmed up the
Bohr-Sommerfeld theory with a little more rigorous mathematics
and that is going to be the end of it. But there is more to the story.
In a formulation that surely sounded as odd then as it does today,
Einstein continues, “we now come to a very essential point which I
carefully avoided mentioning during the … sketch of the basic idea.”
Actually, he points out, if the electron orbits are su ciently
complicated or irregular, so that there is no single period in which
the trajectory wraps back on itself, then his method goes out the
window, along with the whole approach of Bohr and Sommerfeld.
Such complicated, irregular motion is now familiar to modern
physicists, where it is described by the term dynamical chaos.
“One notices immediately,” Einstein concludes, “that [motion of
this type] excludes the quantum condition we have formulated.” So
there is a looming problem for the Bohr-Sommerfeld approach,
which has ba ed Einstein himself, the problem of quantizing
chaotic motion.
Einstein’s work was so advanced that few people understood it at
the time; chaotic motion was not really appreciated until the advent
of modern computers, and topological quantum rules were beyond
everyone’s ken. Despite the fame of its author, the problem
identi ed in his article was ignored for more than fty years, before
a sub eld of theoretical physics emerged known as “quantum chaos
theory.”3 But the paper he had written was not unimportant at the
time; in 1926, when Erwin Schrödinger wrote his epochal series of
papers de ning the wave equation of quantum mechanics, he
included the following footnote: “The framing of the quantum
conditions [in Einstein’s 1917 paper] is the most akin, out of all the
earlier attempts, to the present one.”
1

Wigner arrived in Berlin in 1921 at the age of nineteen and attended the famous physics
colloquia of Berlin University. He witnessed rsthand the completion of quantum theory

and would go on to win the Nobel Prize in 1963 for seminal applications of the theory,
particularly for his identi cation and use of symmetry principles.
2

Paul Epstein was a young Jewish theoretical physicist from Poland who did his PhD with
Sommerfeld and contributed to some further details of the Sommerfeld formulation.
Einstein was rather impressed by him and helped him when he had di culty nding a
permanent job; he eventually immigrated to the United States with the help of Millikan
and became a professor at Caltech.
3

It was Einstein’s 1917 paper that inspired the author to look again at Einstein’s
contributions to quantum theory, as described in the introduction (see A. Douglas Stone,
“Einstein’s Unknown Insight and the Problem of Quantizing Chaos,” Physics Today, August
2005, pp. 37–43).

CHAPTER 23

FIFTEEN MILLION MINUTES
OF FAME
But now I’m just about fed up to the teeth with relativity! Even
such a thing pales when one is too occupied with it.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN TO ELSA EINSTEIN, JAN.
8, 1921
While Einstein struggled to regain his vitality and refocus
his e orts on understanding the atom during the years 1917 and
1918, a singular con uence of social forces was occurring that
would change his life irrevocably. On November 9, 1918, the
German Reich surrendered, the kaiser abdicated, and Germany was
thrown into political turmoil. The Great War would leave a residue
of hatred, resentment, and disillusionment, which would a ect
international scienti c cooperation for a decade. Yet within less
than a year a British scienti c expedition would catapult Einstein to
a level of global fame unprecedented in the history of science.
Arthur Stanley Eddington, the young Plumian Professor of
Astronomy at Cambridge, led the expedition; he had been a
conscientious objector during the war and was a person of
undiplomatic stubbornness in whom Einstein would have recognized
a kindred soul. When the Cambridge dons obtained for him a
deferment from military service, on the grounds of his superior
value as a scientist, he insisted on signing it with the stipulation
that, had he been deemed of greater military value, he would have
refused service anyway. Eddington had championed Einstein’s
theory of general relativity in England and, through the o ces of

the astronomer royal, Sir Frank Dyson, had been put in charge of
the eclipse-observing expeditions that departed in February of 1919
to test Einstein’s quantitative predictions of the bending of the path
of starlight due to the gravitational eld of the sun. With some
eventfulness, in the end these expeditions con rmed Einstein’s
theory and reported their results at the historic meeting of the Royal
Society on November 6, 1919.
The meeting, which the mathematician Alfred North Whitehead
likened to “a Greek drama” in which the “laws of physics are the
decrees of fate,” placed Einstein on the same level as Sir Isaac
Newton in the British scienti c pantheon, leading to J. J. Thomson’s
famous pronouncement that Einstein’s new framework was “one of
the highest achievements of human thought.”1 Something about this
new worldview, arcane but not encased in a protective layer of
technical jargon, captured the general public’s imagination as the
“spectral lines” and “quanta” of atomic theory could never do. Space
was curved; light was subject to gravity; all motion was relative. It
was mind-bending stu , but not incomprehensible techno-speak.
One could conjure with it. And one did.
The New York Times captured the zeitgeist with one of its most
whimsical headlines ever: “Lights All Askew in the Heavens: Men of
Science More or Less Agog Over Results of Eclipse Expeditions.
Einstein Theory Triumphs; Stars Not Where They Seemed or Were
Calculated to be, but Nobody Need Worry. A Book for 12 Wise Men;
No More in All the World Could Comprehend It.”
By September 1920 relativity mania had swept the globe,
leading Einstein to exclaim, “At present every coachman and every
waiter argues about whether or not the relativity theory is correct.”
Einstein’s rst biographer described the ethos thus: “from the
intellectual work of a quiet scholar a message of salvation had
emerged…. No name was uttered as much during that time as that
of this man…. Here was a man who had reached out to the stars, a
man in whose theory one had to penetrate to forget one’s earthly
troubles.” To have a transnational, apolitical gure to admire in the
aftermath of the decade of senseless destruction satis ed a deep, if

unanticipated, social need. And so Einstein became a symbol of
man’s better nature, a potential political force, an ethnic beacon to
the Jews, an inspiration for revolutionary art, and a challenge to
philosophers. His public lectures were sensational events; his
opinions on all things were sought; he should write this or that
commentary, give this or that speech, join this or that committee,
for this or that worthy cause. All of which detracted from his true
life’s mission, to think deeply about nature and, more speci cally, to
nally get to the bottom of the conundrums of atomic theory. He
wrote to his old friend Zangger in January 1921, “the fragmentation
of one’s intentions by the motley array of duties is crippling,
especially for a person made more for concentration than for
conformance.”

FIGURE 23.1. Cover of Berliner Illustrirte Zeitung of December 14, 1919, proclaiming
Einstein as a new genius on the world stage.

While Einstein was soaring to unprecedented celebrity for a
scientist, Germany was struggling to maintain a stable political

order after its defeat in the Great War. The Weimar Republic, with
its liberal constitution, was established in the summer of 1919 and
for the next four years su ered repeated challenges from reactionary
forces, led by the right-wing Freikorps. These forces fed the surge of
anti-Semitism that followed the German surrender and signing of
the Treaty of Versailles. Einstein, due to his newfound prominence,
was a natural target to attack. A fringe group of scientists and
engineers, led by an obscure engineer named Paul Weyland,
attacked relativity theory as fallacious and undermining of the
purity of German Science. Einstein, rather naively, thought that
paying attention to this claque and refuting their claims with a
combination of logical argument and sarcasm would be worthwhile.
After a public meeting of the antirelativists in August of 1920,
which Einstein himself attended, he attacked his critics in a
newspaper article that he rapidly came to regret. “Everyone must,
from time to time, make a sacri ce on the altar of stupidity … and I
did so thoroughly with my article.”
Indeed, in addition to drawing attention to this movement,
which would otherwise have been insigni cant, he also angered a
respectable physicist, Philipp Lenard. Lenard was a Nobel laureate
whose seminal experiments on the photoelectric e ect had partly
inspired Einstein’s breakthrough work on quanta of light. Lenard
had doubted the validity of relativity theory, writing an article
critical of it in 1918, but at this point had never attacked Einstein
personally. Lenard’s stated problem with relativity theory was one
that many could identify with: it violated “sound common sense.”
Lenard was not a theorist, and Einstein’s colleagues would surely
have realized that his criticisms were simply the result of an
inability to grasp the theory’s challenging abstractions. However,
Weyland had appropriated Lenard’s name for his group’s use. and
Einstein had assumed, perhaps with some justi cation, that Lenard
shared their nonscienti c motivations to attack him. Thus he wrote
of Lenard by name: “[he] has so far achieved nothing in theoretical
physics, and his objections to the general theory of relativity are of

such super ciality that until now I had thought it unnecessary to
answer them in detail.”
Lenard naturally took o ense at the insulting tone of Einstein’s
comments, prompting Sommerfeld to implore Einstein to make some
conciliatory gesture, a request to which Einstein never acceded. In
fact this rst urry of German attacks on Einstein’s science, with its
strong overtones of anti-Semitism, was never a major movement and
was widely rejected by the German physics establishment of the
time. Einstein himself felt at the time that his critics were no more
than an annoyance, commenting famously, “I feel like a man lying
in a good bed, but plagued by bedbugs.” A decade later, however,
the bugs would turn poisonous. Lenard would never forgive Einstein
and henceforth opposed him at all turns. Eventually he would join
the Nazi Party and lead its successful e ort to oust Jewish scientists,
including Einstein, from the Prussian academy, and eradicate
“Jewish physics” from the textbooks.
Although in 1921, at the time of these early attacks, Einstein’s
scienti c colleagues felt that it was unwise of him to engage with
this rabble at all, they uniformly defended him. Most striking was a
statement by von Laue, Nernst, and Rubens: “It cannot be our task
to discuss in detail the unparalleled profound intellectual work
which led Einstein to his theory of relativity…. What we do want to
emphasize, and what was not touched upon in a single work
yesterday [at the antirelativity meeting], is that quite apart from
Einstein’s relativistic research, his other work already assures him of an
immortal place in the history of science” (italics added). So while the
public either swooned or fumed over relativity theory, his Berlin
colleagues had not lost sight of the fact that Einstein was the
conceptual leader of the new atomic physics. And they had not
abandoned the hope that he would yet come up with a true and
complete quantum theory.
Einstein himself, however, seemed for the rst time in his life
easily distracted from his scienti c research. Although he did not
feel truly threatened by the anti-Semitic mood of the right wing in
1920, it did appear to rekindle a sense of ethnic identi cation with

his Jewish brethren. In April 1920 he addressed a Jewish group as
follows: “there is in me nothing which can be described as ‘Jewish
faith.’ But I am happy to belong to the Jewish people.” Not that he
had any sympathy for religious observances, as he made clear to a
rabbi with whom he had debated: “The [religious Jewish]
community is an organization for the exercise of ritualistic forms
that are remote from my opinions. I must take it for what it is today
and not for what one might perhaps wish to see it transformed into.
When I want to drive into town, I do not lay myself down in bed in
the hope that it will grow wheels and become an automobile….
[However] I gladly vow … all kinds of e orts in the interest of
individual Jews and Jewish communities.”
In keeping with this pronouncement, less than a year later,
despite his professed desire to focus on science, he immediately
agreed to an invitation from Chaim Weizmann, the president of the
World Zionist Organization, to accompany him to the United States
to solicit funding for the planned Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
Never mind that the trip’s schedule would require his withdrawal
from the rst of the revived Solvay Congresses, on “atoms and
electrons,” and that among his many talents and interests fundraising had never previously gured. To Haber (who greatly
opposed his participation), he confessed: “I am not needed for my
abilities, of course, but only for my name. Its promotional power is
anticipated to bring considerable success thanks to our rich fellow
clansmen of Dollaria (Einstein’s nickname for the USA).” However,
he regarded his participation as a moral duty: “Despite my declared
international mentality, I do still always feel obliged to speak up for
my persecuted and morally oppressed fellow clansmen, as far as it is
within my powers…. The prospect of establishing a Jewish
university delights me especially, after recently seeing from
countless examples how per diously and unkindly ne young Jews
are being treated here in the attempt to deprive them of educational
opportunities.” In fact, while Einstein created a sensation
everywhere he went in America, adding to his legend, the trip was
only modestly successful in its monetary goals.

This trip seemed to spark a wanderlust in Einstein that he had
not previously demonstrated. During the next two years, in addition
to the trip to the United States, mainly by his own choice, he would
visit Holland, Austria, Czechoslovakia, England, France, Italy,
Switzerland, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Palestine, Spain,
Sweden, and Denmark, not a program conducive to deep
contemplation. However, in the summer of 1921, after returning
from the United States, Einstein brie y turned his thoughts to the
problem of light quanta once again.
While Einstein had by this time developed his notion of “ghost
elds” to explain how particles of light could exhibit the
interference e ects associated with waves, he did not think that the
net result for observations would be exactly as predicted by the
classical theory of electromagnetic waves. Thus he sought an
experimental test that would directly distinguish his theory, in
which all energy was carried by individual light quanta, from the
predictions of classical optics. In August of 1921 he thought he had
found one, a “very interesting and quite simple experiment about
the nature of light emission…. I hope I can carry it out soon.”2

FIGURE 23.2. Einstein and his second wife, Elsa Einstein, photographed on their trip to
the USA in 1921. Library of Congress, courtesy AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.

The idea was indeed quite simple, but awed. Einstein assumed
that light quanta would not show the Doppler e ect when emitted
from a moving atom (i.e., its frequency would not be shifted
depending on the angle between its motion and the line of sight to
the detector), whereas classical radiation was known to show such
an e ect. Thus he suggested imaging the light from moving atoms
through a telescope lens with an inserted prismlike element, to
di erentially de ect the light of di erent frequencies. He calculated
that the classical theory would give a de ected image and his
quantum theory would not. He did not have to do the experiment
himself, nding the seasoned professionals Walter Bothe and Hans
Geiger quite happy to do these relatively easy measurements. They

were completed in December of 1921; no de ection of the image
was detected.
Einstein, again ecstatic, as he had been after his work on quanta
in 1916, told Born the latest news. “Thanks to the excellent
collaboration of Geiger and Bothe, the experiment on light emission
is nished. Result: The emission of light by the moving [atom] is
strictly monochromatic, whereas according to the undulatory
theory, the color of the elementary emission ought to be di erent in
di erent directions. Thus it is surely proven that the undulatory
eld has no real existence…. It is my most powerful scienti c
experience in years.” However Einstein’s exultation was short-lived.
Independently, Ehrenfest and Max von Laue pointed out that
Einstein had got the classical prediction wrong; both the classical
and the quantum theory predicted no e ect. Einstein redid the
calculations himself and presented the amended conclusion a couple
of months later: “in light of this theoretical result, deeper
conclusions cannot be derived from the experiment concerning the
nature of the emission process.” He wrote again to Born, with
characteristic self-deprecation, “I … committed a monumental
blunder (experiment about the emission of light …). But one
shouldn’t take it too seriously. Death alone can save one from
making blunders.” He was clearly getting frustrated, once again,
with the unyielding quantum: “I suppose it is a good thing that I
have so much to distract me, else the quantum problem would have
long got me into a lunatic asylum…. How miserable the theoretical
physicist is in the face of nature.”
The many distractions associated with his fame were
compounded when, in June of 1922, right-wing extremists
assassinated Walter Rathenau, the German foreign minister.
Rathenau, the rst Jew to hold that post, was a personal friend of
Einstein’s, and not only did his loss shake Einstein’s equanimity, but
in its aftermath multiple threats were received to his own life. He
hid out in the country, sheltered by a rich friend, Hermann
Anschütz, and even toyed brie y with quitting physics research and
working as an engineer, with “a downright normal human

existence” and the “welcome chance of practical work.” This
fanciful notion vanished in a few days, but he avoided the German
physics meeting in Leipzig, bitterly disappointing the twenty-oneyear-old Werner Heisenberg, who attended with the hope of
meeting him.3 In a letter to Solovine, his longtime friend and
“Olympia Academy” alumnus, Einstein recounted: “I am constantly
being warned, I have given up my lecture course and am o cially
absent although I am really here. Anti-semitism is very strong.” He
felt it was fortunate that he had “the opportunity of a prolonged
absence from Germany,” as he had committed himself to an
extended lecturing trip to Japan and points east in October of 1922.
However, an unexpected wrinkle developed in his plans when he
was informed by Svante Arrhenius, who still ruled the Physics
Committee for the Nobel Prize, that “it will probably be very
desirable for you to come to Stockholm in December, and if you are
in Japan that will be impossible.” The Nobel committee had nally
been moved to award the most famous scientist since Newton its
stamp of approval. Characteristically, Einstein was not disposed to
dance to the tune of the establishment, particularly for an institution
that had passed him over for so long; despite Arrhenius’s hints that
Einstein’s absence might put the nal vote in doubt, he replied that
he was “quite unable to postpone the journey.” So o he went to
Japan by ship, on schedule, receiving news of his award somewhere
en route on an unknown date, as he failed to even note the event
with an entry in his travel diary. Nonetheless, the citation on the
award surprised many: “for his services to theoretical physics and
especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric e ect.”
The Nobel committee had found relativity theory too uncertain and
controversial for recognition but instead came to rest on the one
work by Einstein that he himself considered “revolutionary.”
While there was much irony in this development, in fact the
citation was carefully crafted to recognize the empirical law of the
photoelectric e ect, and not the underlying theory. This law had
already been con rmed in great detail by the American physicist
Robert Millikan by 1916, and by many other experiments

subsequently, so it could no longer be doubted. Millikan himself
wrung his hands at his own results, saying “I spent ten years of my
life testing that 1905 equation of Einstein and, contrary to all my
expectations, I was compelled to assert its unambiguous
experimental veri cation in spite of its unreasonableness, since it
seemed to violate everything we knew about the interference of
light.” The Nobel citation said nothing about quanta of light, a
concept that was still rejected by the overwhelming majority of
physicists. In fact Bohr, despite his deep admiration for Einstein,
could not resist a rather biting joke at Einstein’s expense, saying that
if he received a telegram from Einstein con rming the existence of
light quanta, he would point out that the telegram itself, transmitted
by electromagnetic waves, was proof against them.
Einstein did not return to Germany until the spring of 1923, and
he went to collect his Nobel Prize in the summer. By this time he
was involved in a di erent scienti c quest, his famous attempt to
unify the gravitational and electromagnetic forces by means of a
“uni ed eld theory.” However, he was very hopeful that such a
theory would itself point the way to the solution of the quantum
problem, even submitting a paper along those lines to the Prussian
Academy in December of that year. In 1924, in a radio address, he
informed the public, who only wanted to hear about relativity
theory, that he was really focused on something else:
The other great problem that I have been concerned with since
about 1900 is that of radiation and the quantum theory.
Stimulated by the work of Wien and Planck, I recognized that
mechanics and electrodynamics were in irresolvable
contradiction with experimental facts, and so I have helped in
creating the complex of ideas known by the name of quantum
theory, which has been developed so fruitfully particularly by
Bohr. I shall probably devote the rest of my life to the
fundamental clari cation of this problem, however slight the
prospects are for attaining the goal may be.

In fact the goal was now rather close, although it would not take the
form Einstein hoped, and he was about to make his nal historic
contribution to reaching it.
1
2

This was often later misquoted as the highest achievement.

It is notable that Einstein, despite having become the paradigm of the pure theorist to the
public, was still quite willing to contemplate actually setting up and performing such an
experiment himself.
3

Sommerfeld, with whom Heisenberg was studying, had promised to introduce him to
Einstein, who had been Heisenberg’s idol from his high school days. Heisenberg was
appalled to nd an anti-Semitic lea et attacking Einstein thrust into his hand as he entered
the hall where von Laue was delivering the lecture on Einstein’s behalf.

CHAPTER 24

THE INDIAN COMET

Respected Sir:
I have ventured to send you the accompanying article for your
perusal and opinion. I am anxious to know what you think of it.
You will see that I have tried to deduce the coe cient 8πυ2/c3 in
Planck’s Law independent of the classical electrodynamics, only
assuming that the ultimate elementary region in the phase-space
has the content h3.
This letter to Einstein from an unknown Indian scientist,
received in early June, 1924, initiated one of the most extraordinary
episodes in the modern history of science, culminating in Einstein’s
nal historic contribution to the structure of the new quantum
theory. At the time of his writing, Satyendra Nath Bose was a thirtyyear-old Reader (roughly equivalent to the rank of associate
professor) at Dacca University in East Bengal. His previous ve
research papers had made no impact at all on contemporary
research, and he had recently been informed that, due to a funding
cuto to the university, his appointment would not be extended
more than a year. Moreover, the paper he was sending to Einstein
had already been submitted for publication, and rejected, by the
English journal Philosophical Magazine. He had admired Einstein for
many years and had even produced a rather undistinguished
translation of Einstein’s papers on general relativity into English, for
distribution in India. Thus, through some combination of veneration
and chutzpah, he hit upon the idea of sending this paper, which

related closely to Einstein’s 1916 work on radiation theory, directly
to the master, with an astonishing request:
I do not know su cient German to translate the paper. If you
think the paper worth publication, I shall be grateful if you
arrange for its publication in Zeitschrift fur Physik. Though a
complete stranger to you, I do not feel any hesitation in making
such a request. Because we are all your pupils though pro ting
only by your teachings through your writings.
Yours faithfully, S. N. Bose.
Einstein by that time, as we have seen, was not just the most
famous scientist of his time; he was one of the best-known
individuals on the entire planet. He was deluged by letters from
strangers, wanting his opinion on everything under the sun, while at
the same time struggling to keep up his voluminous scienti c
correspondence with the large community of physicists with whom
he had personal and professional relations. In addition, Einstein
spoke very little English and had not been able to deliver his
prestigious lectures in England during his visit in 1921 in the native
tongue of his audience.1 The a priori probability that S. N. Bose’s
paper would end up in the circular le, his work and his name lost
to posterity, was extremely high.
But that is not what happened. Einstein read the paper shortly
after its arrival, translated it, and sent it to the German journal
Zeitschrift für Physik on July 2, 1924, with his strong endorsement.
There it was subsequently published, with a note from Einstein
appended. “In my opinion Bose’s derivation of the Planck formula
signi es an important advance. The method used also yields the
quantum theory of the ideal gas, as I will work out in detail
elsewhere.” In fact, shortly thereafter Einstein translated a second
paper, which he had received from Bose on the heels of the rst one
and which he sent on to the journal by July 7, 1924. This one did
not elicit such a favorable opinion from the great man, and he

published a critical comment along with it, while nonetheless
supporting its publication.
With these magnanimous gestures from the sage, the die was
cast. Bose would go on to become one of the most famous names in
the history of modern physics. The term “boson” is used for one of
the two fundamental categories of elementary particles in modern
physics2 because such particles obey novel statistical laws rst
employed, although not announced, in Bose’s initial paper sent to
Einstein. This category includes Einstein’s photons (light quanta) as
well as roughly half of the atoms in the periodic table. But Bose’s
discovery, like that of Planck twenty-four years earlier, was not as
clear-cut as it has been portrayed, and again it would take Einstein
to nd the radical implications in it.
S. N. Bose was born into the rising middle class of Englisheducated Indians in 1894 in Calcutta. He father, an accountant, had
a wide range of intellectual interests that he transmitted to his son,
who, in addition to his great aptitude for mathematics, became
deeply interested in poetry, music, and diverse languages. When he
matriculated at the Presidency College in Calcutta in 1909,
however, he chose to study science, at least partly because of its
potential utility to the future Indian nation, as a wave of
nationalism swept through his generation. His cohort was “a
particularly brilliant lot—the famous 1909 batch of Presidency
College … [which] in all its history has not seen the likes … since.”
Bose completed his BSc in 1913 and MSc in 1915, taking rst place
in both examinations; but there was no obvious avenue for
obtaining a doctorate, and the professorial ranks were still reserved
for third-rate English academics at that time. Bose therefore went
through a period as a striving outsider, not dissimilar to the career
of Einstein at the same age.
He married early (prior to graduation) but, contrary to custom,
refused to accept a dowry or other nancial support from his wife’s
family. Already responsible for a wife and son shortly after he
received his MSc, he spent a year eking out a living through private
tutoring, while trying to work toward a PhD in mathematics with a

well-known professor, Ganesh Prasad. Prasad was noted for his
aggressive criticism of prospective students and of their previous
teachers, which typically cowed the candidates into silence. But
Bose was “notorious for plain speaking.” In an echo of Einstein’s
con icts with authority gures such as Weber, Bose “dared to
counter his adverse criticisms” and was summarily dismissed from
consideration for PhD work with the comment, “you may have done
well in the examination, but that does not mean you are cut [out]
for research.” “Disappointed, I came away [and] decided to work on
my own,” Bose recalled.
Like Einstein, he was turned down for low-level teaching jobs
before being o ered an entry-level lectureship in the new University
College of Science in Calcutta, whose founder, Sir Asutosh
Mookerjee, began hiring the cream of young Indian scientists,
including the future Nobel laureate C. V. Raman. It was at the
College of Science that Bose rst began to learn about the exciting
developments in physics in Europe associated with the names of
Planck, Einstein, and Bohr. Here also he and his close friend, the
physicist Meghnad Saha, obtained and translated important German
works of physics, including Einstein’s papers on relativity theory.
In 1921 Bose accepted a faculty position at the new University of
Dacca, in East Bengal, recently established by an ambitious vicechancellor, P. J. Hartog. At Dacca he “spent many sleepless nights”
trying to understand the Planck law, while at the same time
teaching it to his students. He felt an obligation to present
something to them that he himself found clear and consistent: “As a
teacher who had to make these things clear to his students I was
aware of the con icts involved…. I wanted to know how to grapple
with the di culty in my own way…. I wanted to know.” In late 1923
he hit upon his new approach to deriving the law and sent o a
manuscript to the Philosophical Magazine, where he had previously
published papers on quantum theory, only to receive the reply, in
the spring of 1924, that the referee’s decision had been negative. It
was at this point that Bose took the bold step of sending the paper
to Einstein, a strategy so speculative that its success appeared to

violate the very principle of maximum entropy employed in the
paper itself!
It was remarkable, but nonetheless true, that Planck’s blackbody
formula remained somewhat mysterious a full twenty-four years
after Planck’s initial derivation. It was not that anyone doubted any
longer the validity of the formula, but the tortured reasoning Planck
had used to derive it left physicists unsatis ed for decades. That is
why Bose’s paper, titled “Planck’s Law and the Quantum
Hypothesis.” was of interest to Einstein and others. As we saw
earlier, Planck had been reluctant to treat radiation directly with
statistical mechanics, and instead, using classical reasoning, he
related the mean energy of radiation at a given frequency to the
mean energy of idealized vibrating molecules (“resonators”). He
then calculated the entropy of these resonators by introducing into
the counting of states his quantized energy “trick.” A key factor in
totaling up the number of allowed states in Planck’s method, which
was not appreciated for quite some time, was that one could treat
the units of energy belonging to each resonator as indistinguishable
quantities (i.e., if resonator one had seven units of energy hυ and
resonator two had nine units, one didn’t have to ask which units
they were). In 1912 Peter Debye, an outstanding young theorist and
future Nobel laureate, rederived the Planck law, not by counting
resonator states, but by counting states of classical electromagnetic
waves that could t in the blackbody cavity and then ascribing to
them the same average energy that Planck had assigned to each
resonator. The counting of the number of allowable waves in the
cavity led to the factor in the Planck radiation formula, 8πυ2/c3, to
which Bose alludes in his letter to Einstein. This factor was very
easy to nd from classical wave physics but very hard to nd from
quantum principles, hence Bose’s emphasis on having found a
quantum route to it.
It was clear that Einstein had been troubled by Planck’s
derivation from his earliest works, but not until 1916 had he even
tried to justify this law, succeeding marvelously with his “perfectly
quantic” paper, which introduced the concepts of spontaneous and

stimulated emission of photons, as well as providing strong
arguments for the reality of photons. One major reason that Einstein
was so happy with this work, and even called it “the derivation” of
Planck’s formula, was that it did not at any point use the strange
counting of the distribution of energy units that Planck had
employed. Instead he managed to get the same answer by a di erent
route, based on Bohr’s quantized atomic energy levels and his own
plausible hypotheses about the balancing out of all emission and
absorption processes. Bose, though, was not completely happy even
with this method and claimed to have found an even more
ideologically pure derivation.
Bose’s paper is concise in the extreme, running to less than two
journal pages. He begins the work by laying out his motivation for
presenting yet another approach to the Planck law. “Planck’s
formula … forms the starting point for the quantum theory …
[which] has yielded rich harvests in all elds of physics … since its
publication in 1901 many types of derivations of this law have been
suggested. It is acknowledged that the fundamental assumptions of
the quantum theory are inconsistent with the laws of classical
electrodynamics.” However, Bose continues, the factor 8πυ2/c3
“could be deduced only from the classical theory. This is the
unsatisfactory point in all derivations.” Even the “remarkably
elegant derivation … given by Einstein” ultimately relies on some
concepts from the classical theory, which he identi es as “Wien’s
displacement law” and “Bohr’s correspondence principle,” so that
“in all cases it appears to me that the derivations have insu cient
logical foundation.”
Einstein did not agree with this criticism and even took time out
during his rst, quite friendly letter to Bose to dispute it: “However I
do not nd your objection to my paper correct. Wien’s displacement
law does not presuppose [classical] wave theory, and Bohr’s
correspondence principle is not used. But this is unimportant. You
have derived the rst factor [8πυ2/c3] quantum-mechanically…. It is
a beautiful step forward.” On both points Einstein was correct.3 Bose
had come up with a more direct method of getting the result, the

rst to use only the photon concept itself, a tremendously appealing
simpli cation.
Ever since Einstein’s 1905 paper on light quanta, there had been
a glaring logical problem with taking quanta seriously as elementary
particles. In dealing with the statistical mechanics of a gas of
molecules, it is possible to derive all the important thermodynamics
relations, such as the “ideal gas law” (PV = RT),4 without ever
specifying any other system with which the gas molecules interact.
It is enough to simply say that there exist other large systems
(“reservoirs”) with which the gas can exchange energy. Then
counting the states of the gas, using the classical method (no h!)
pioneered by Boltzmann, leads to both the entropy and the energy
distribution of the gas molecules, and eventually to all the known
relations.5 The very same approach appeared to fail for quanta of
light; it led to Wien’s incorrect radiation law, and not Planck’s. This
was a major problem, which, along with the di culty in explaining
the interference properties of light, led to the consensus that light
quanta weren’t “real” particles but some sort of heuristic construct.
This consensus had survived even the awarding of the Nobel Prize
to Einstein for the photoelectric e ect. Bose’s work shows how to
escape from the rst of these dilemmas.
Bose sets out to count the possible states, W, into which many
light quanta of energy hυ and momentum hυ/c can be distributed
according to quantum principles. From this, by a variant of Planck’s
method, he obtains the average entropy and energy of the photon
gas.6 Step one is to consider a single light quantum, with energy hυ
and momentum hυ/c. If a photon were to be treated as a real,
classical particle, one ought to be able to specify its state at each
time by its position and its momentum. Physicists refer to such
quantities as vectors, since they carry both a magnitude and a
direction (e.g., the photon is 5 blocks northeast, with its momentum
[always parallel to its direction of motion] due south). The
momentum for a massive particle is just its mass times its velocity
vector (when its speed is much less than c); but a photon’s speed
(magnitude of velocity) is always equal to c, and Einstein has shown

(e.g., in his 1916 work) that the magnitude of its momentum is hυ/c
(not m times c, since the photon has zero mass).
Counting the position states of the photon is not the hard part of
Bose’s argument; one assumes that the photon gas is enclosed in a
box of volume V and it can be anywhere within V, with equal
probability (this point was used by Einstein in his original
arguments for the photon concept when analyzing the blackbody
entropy back in 1905). Therefore Bose focuses on counting
momentum states. Since the possible directions of photon motion are
continuous and hence in nite, he has to employ an idea already
proposed by Planck as early as 1906. Planck’s constant, h, de nes a
quantum limit on the smallest di erence in momentum that can be
resolved.7 Since all photons of frequency υ have the same magnitude
of momentum, hυ/c, which is assumed equally likely to point in any
direction, Bose can count their states by tiling the surface of a
sphere of radius hυ/c with these “Planck cells.” From basic geometry
and the assumption that the spherical shell is only one cell thick, he
is then able to nd the number of states,8 8πυ2/c3.
Up to this point, what Bose has done is logically appealing but
not historic. It was his next step that caused his paper to become
“the fourth and last of the revolutionary papers of the old quantum
theory.” He still has to obtain the Planck form for the radiation law
and not the Wien form. For this next, crucial step he has to calculate
how many physically distinct ways there are to put many photons at
the same time into these available states. But Bose does not appear
to realize that the next step is the big one; instead he seems to think
that the previous one was the most signi cant. He begins the
relevant paragraph by saying, “It is now very simple to calculate the
thermodynamic probability of a macroscopically de ned state.”
After a few de nitions, he unveils his answer, a rather obscure
combinatorial formula bristling with factorial symbols. This is the
key intermediate step. From here on, nding the Planck formula is
inevitable and just involves straightforward manipulations, within
the competence of scores of his contemporaries.

This paltry written record leaves an enormous historical
question. To what extent did Bose understand the key concept in his
“revolutionary” derivation? For buried in Bose’s factorial formula is
a very deep and bold assertion. This formula implies that
interchange of two photons in the photon gas does not lead to
di erent physical states, unlike the standard, classical, Boltzmann
assumption for the atomic gas. Boltzmann, and everyone else after
him, assumed that even though atoms were very small and
presumably all “looked” the same, one could imagine labeling them
and keeping track of them. And if photons were particles like atoms,
one should be able to do the same thing. Photon 1 having
momentum toward the north and photon 2 having momentum
toward the south was a physically di erent condition from photon 2
north, photon 1 south. Bose, without saying a word about it in his
paper, implicitly denied this was so!
Late in his life Bose was asked about this critical hypothesis
concerning the microscopic world, which followed from his work.
He replied with remarkable candor:
I had no idea that what I had done was really novel…. I was not
a statistician to the extent of really knowing that I was doing
something which was really di erent from what Boltzmann
would have done, from Boltzmann statistics. Instead of thinking
about the light quantum just as a particle, I talked about these
states. Somehow this was the same question that Einstein asked
when I met him: How had I arrived at this method of deriving
Planck’s formula? Well, I recognized the contradictions in the
attempts of Planck and Einstein, and applied statistics in my own
way, but I did not think that it was di erent from Boltzmann
statistics [italics added].
Recall that in his derivation Bose was guided by the knowledge
of the end point, the precisely known formula for the Planck
radiation law. So he did not have to convince himself in advance
that his counting method was justi ed; it turned out to be the
method that gave the “correct” answer, so it would seem to be

justi ed a posteriori. He appears to have missed the fact that in
asserting this new counting method, he had made a profound
discovery about the atomic world, that elementary particles are
indistinguishable in a new and fundamental sense.
Einstein, despite his initial enthusiasm for the prefactor
derivation, very quickly grasped that the truly signi cant but
puzzling thing about the Bose work was the postclassical counting
method. Soon after receiving Bose’s paper, he expressed this in a
letter to Ehrenfest: “[the Bose] derivation is elegant, but the essence
remains obscure.” He would pursue and ultimately elucidate this
obscure essence for the next seven months.
Bose, not having fully appreciated the novelty of his rst paper,
placed a great deal of emphasis on his second paper, which was
dated June 14, 1924, and sent to Einstein immediately on the heels
of the rst one. This paper is not a rederivation of a known result, as
is his previous paper, but an attempt to reformulate the quantum
theory of radiation, in direct contradiction to Einstein’s classic 1916
work. The paper, titled “Thermal Equilibrium of the Radiation Field
in the Presence of Matter,” proposes a bold hypothesis. While there
still is a balance between quantum emission and absorption leading
to equilibrium, the emission process is assumed to be completely
spontaneous and independent of the presence or absence of external
radiation. Bose has eliminated Einstein’s hypothesis of stimulated
emission, which he refers to as “negative irradiation,” saying it is
“not necessary” in his theory. To make things balance out, he then
has to assume that the probability of absorption also has a di erent
and more complicated dependence on the energy density of
radiation than Einstein assumed.
Einstein, who was a virtuoso at nding absurd implications of
awed theories since his days at the patent o ce, published a
decisive critical note appended to his translation of this paper. First,
he notes that Bose’s hypothesis “contradicts the generally and
rightly accepted principle that the classical theory represents a
limiting case of the quantum theory…. in the classical theory a
radiation eld may transfer to a resonator positive or negative

energy with equal likelihood.” Second, Bose’s strange hypothesis
about the nature of absorption implies that a “cold body should
absorb [infrared radiation] less readily than the less intense
radiation [at higher frequencies]…. It is quite certain that this e ect
would have been already discovered for the infrared radiation of hot
sources if it were really true.” Because of these compelling
arguments, Bose’s only published attempt to extend quantum theory
had no in uence on the eld and is solely of historical interest.
Nonetheless, Einstein’s recognition of Bose’s
rst paper
transformed his professional situation in an instant. Einstein’s
supportive postcard to Bose congratulating him on his “beautiful
step forward” was shown to the vice-chancellor at Dacca, and it
“solved all problems.” Bose recalled, “that little thing [the postcard]
gave me a sort of passport for [a two-year] study leave [in Europe]
… on rather generous terms…. Then I also got a visa from the
German consulate just by showing them Einstein’s card.”
By mid-October of 1924 Bose had arrived in Paris and was
introduced to the noted physicist Paul Langevin, who was a personal
friend of Einstein’s. Bose immediately wrote to Einstein, asking
Einstein’s opinion on his second paper (which he was unaware had
already been published with Einstein’s assistance) and expressing
his desire to “work under you, for it will mean the realization of a
long cherished hope.” Einstein quickly replied, “I am glad I shall
have the opportunity soon of making your personal acquaintance,”
then summarized his reasons for rejecting Bose’s conclusions in the
second paper and concluded by saying, “we may discuss this
together in detail when you come here.”
Despite the warmth of Einstein’s reply, Bose was reluctant to
move on to Berlin immediately, in part because Einstein’s potent
critique had made him unsure of his new proposal, which he wanted
to re ne further. In addition he seems to have found the change of
cultures challenging; he decided to settle in Paris in the company of
a local circle of Indian compatriot intellectuals. He justi ed this as
follows: “because I was a teacher … and had to teach both
theoretical and experimental physics … my motivation then became

to learn all about the techniques I could in Paris … radioactivity
from Madame Curie and also something of x-ray spectroscopy.” An
interviewer of Bose in 1972 noted that “even more than forty years
later one still has the impression that Bose was terribly intimidated
by most Europeans.” This no doubt contributed to his disastrous
interview with Madame Curie, concerning joining her lab. She had
hosted a previous Indian visitor and had xed it in her mind that
the collaboration had failed because of his poor French. Thus she
conducted her rst interview with Bose entirely in English, and
while welcoming him warmly, rmly insisted he would need four
months of language preparation before starting work. Although “she
was very nice,” Bose, who had studied French already for ten years,
found no opportunity to interrupt her monologue. And so “I wasn’t
able to tell her,” he later explained, “that I knew su cient French
and could manage to work in her laboratory.”
Despite this missed opportunity, Bose tarried in Paris nearly a
full year learning x-ray techniques before working up the courage to
move on to Berlin in October of 1925 and nally meeting Einstein a
few weeks later. In the intervening year, Einstein had taken up
Bose’s novel counting method and extended it to treat the quantum
ideal gas, leading to truly remarkable discoveries, about which Bose
was unaware. For Bose, “the meeting was most interesting…. he
challenged me. He wanted to nd out whether my hypothesis, this
particular kind of statistics, did really mean something novel about
the interaction of quanta, and whether I could work out the details
of this business.” During Bose’s visit, Werner Heisenberg’s rst
paper came out on the new approach to quantum theory known as
matrix mechanics (of which we will hear more later). Einstein
speci cally suggested that Bose try to understand “what the
statistics of light quanta and the transition probabilities for radiation
would look like in the new theory.”
However, Bose was not able to make progress. He seems to have
had a di cult time assimilating these rapid new developments and
wrote somewhat despairingly to a friend: “I have made an honest
resolution of working hard during these months, but it is so hard to

begin, when once you have given up the habit.” Bose received
extensive access to the scienti c elite of Berlin through Einstein’s
patronage and experienced the whirlwind of excitement around the
revolution in atomic theory. But no publication resulted from his
stay in Europe, and in late summer of 1926 he returned to Dacca. By
then the new quantum mechanics had passed him by.

FIGURE 24.1. S. N. Bose photographed in Paris in 1924. Courtesy of Falguni Sarkar, SN
Bose Project, www.snbose.org.

Bose became a revered teacher and administrator in his
subsequent career in India, but he published little, and nothing that
has survived in the scienti c canon. He continued to write to
Einstein, periodically, and late in Einstein’s life tried to visit him in
Princeton, but he was denied a visa because “your senator McCarthy
objected to the fact that I had seen Russia rst.” He eulogized
Einstein eloquently upon his death: “His indomitable will never
bowed down to tyranny, and his love of man often induced him to

speak unpalatable truths which were sometimes misunderstood. His
name would remain indissolubly linked up with all the daring
achievements of physical sciences of this era, and the story of his
life a dazzling example of what can be achieved by pure thought.”
For his own part, Bose seemed content with his role in scienti c
history, summing up his career aptly: “On my return to India I wrote
some papers … they were not so important. I was not really in
science any more. I was like a comet, a comet which came once and
never returned again.”
1

Even after he moved to the United States in 1933, Einstein never fully mastered the
language, and one of his close collaborators, Leopold Infeld, said he functioned with “about
300 words, which he pronounced very weirdly.”
2

Bosons are the force-carrying particles of the fundamental elds. The most recent
con rmed member of this group is the Higgs boson, related to the electroweak interaction.
Atoms are not fundamental particles, but are composites of quarks and electrons that can
still behave statistically as bosons.
3

The displacement law, which constrains the form of the Planck law but does not
determine it, follows from general principles of thermodynamics and doesn’t require
Maxwell’s equations. And Einstein had not used Bohr’s correspondence principle, which at
that time related only to the mechanics of atoms, but had simply used the known
coe cient of the Rayleigh-Jeans law. However, the latter did require some form of
counting of waves, so at least the thrust of this objection by Bose had some merit.
4

Here P is pressure, V is volume, T is temperature, and R is the gas constant, related to
Boltzmann’s constant, k, discussed earlier. A special case of this law is Boyle’s law, that gas
pressure is inversely proportional to its volume at xed temperature.
5

In the next chapter we will see that there actually were subtle aws in this method,
which Einstein would discover and then, through the application of Bose’s ideas, show that
the real ideal gas will deviate from the classical behavior found by Boltzmann. But these
deviations were not yet detectable, and the problem was not with the concept of a gas
connected to unspeci ed reservoirs but with Boltzmann’s counting method.
6

Henceforth I will use “photon” (the modern term) and “light quanta” (Einstein and Bose’s
term) interchangeably. The photon gas is the standard modern terminology.
7

Actually the relevant unit of “resolution” is a cell simultaneously in position and
momentum, known as a “phase space volume” (mentioned in Bose’s rst letter to Einstein);
this cell has volume h3 (again as mentioned in Bose’s letter).
8

In this argument he includes at the end a nal factor of 2 he needs to recover the correct
coe cient by assuming that the concept of polarization of EM waves can be extended to
photons. Since polarization is a property of waves and not particles, this step was not
completely rigorous, as Einstein pointed out to Bose. Much later Bose would claim that he

had proposed that the photon has a spin with two possible states, now the accepted theory,
but that Einstein had rejected this view and “crossed it out” of the rst paper.

CHAPTER 25

QUANTUM DICE

Just under two years before Einstein’s famous rejection of
the new quantum mechanics with the memorable phrase “I … am
convinced that [God] is not playing at dice,” Einstein himself,
inspired by Bose, changed the laws governing the playing of dice.
Bose had unwittingly introduced a new method of counting the
states of a physical system in order to derive the Planck law from
direct consideration of a gas of light quanta, treated as particles, not
waves. It was Einstein who would now explain and extend this new
representation of the microscopic world to resolve long-standing
paradoxes in gas theory and to reveal dramatic and previously
undreamed-of behavior of atomic gases at low temperature.
Einstein had become renowned as the young genius of statistical
physics (“Boltzmann reborn”) through the sponsorship of Nernst
fteen years earlier, when Nernst realized that only Einstein’s
radical quantum theory of the speci c heat of solids would validate
his own famous “heat theorem”: that the entropy of all systems
should tend to zero as the temperature goes to zero. This fortunate
con uence of Einstein’s quantum principles and the interests of the
most powerful scientist in Germany had played a signi cant role in
winning Einstein his comfortable Berlin existence, free of teaching
and administrative responsibilities. Einstein was now to add a
sequel to this story.
Nernst had been arguing since 1912 that something similar to
Einstein’s freezing of particles into their lowest quantum states must
occur for a gas of atoms or molecules at su ciently low
temperatures. However, how this would come about for a gas was a
major puzzle. Gas particles are free to move over macroscopic

distances, unlike electrons bound to atomic nuclei. In quantum
theory, the larger the volume over which a particle is constrained to
move, the smaller is its lowest allowed energy level, known as its
“ground state.” When you worked out this amount of energy for a
gas particle in a container of human scale, it was absurdly small
compared with the thermal energy scale, kT, even when the
temperature was reduced to a few degrees above absolute zero.1 So
gas particles did not freeze out in the same way that vibrations of a
solid did, according to the now-accepted form of Einstein’s 1907
theory, re ned by Peter Debye. Planck, Sommerfeld, and others had
analyzed gases from the point of view of quantum mechanics and
had failed to nd an entropy function that obeyed Nernst’s theorem.
Of course, as we have learned, entropy is all about counting
possibilities, and all the previous attempts had counted possibilities
from the same point of view as Boltzmann. This point of view
regarded atoms or molecules, even if identical in appearance, as
distinct, distinguishable entities, in the same self-evident sense that
a well-made pair of dice are identical in appearance but are distinct
entities. It was this very obvious but very fundamental extrapolation
from our macroscopic world that Bose had implicitly denied, and
which Einstein would now explicitly deny. Einstein would yet again
tell the world that our collective intuition about commonsense
properties of the natural world is mistaken.
Einstein must have realized immediately, upon reading it, that
Bose’s approach would allow him to resolve the decade-old problem
of the quantum ideal gas. For on July 10, 1924, just a few weeks
after receiving, translating, and submitting Bose’s rst paper for
publication, Einstein was reading his own paper, titled “Quantum
Theory of the Monatomic Ideal Gas,” to the Prussian Academy. This
was the work to which he had alluded already in his famous
“Comment of the Translator” published at the end of Bose’s rst
paper: “The method used here also yields the quantum theory of the
ideal gas, as I will show in another place.” He minces no words in
his opening to the gas theory paper: “A quantum theory of the …
ideal gas free of arbitrary assumptions did not exist before now. This

defect will be lled here on the basis of a new analysis developed by
Bose…. What follows can be characterized as a striking impact of
Bose’s method.”
In the next section of the paper Einstein directly follows the
same computational method that Bose applied to the gas of light
quanta, now applied to a gas of atoms. The analysis di ers in only
two signi cant ways. First, as Bose correctly assumed, a gas of
photons loses energy as it is cooled simply by the disappearance of
photons. As we already know, according to quantum theory, a
photon is absorbed and disappears when it excites an electron in an
atom to a higher energy level (and similarly can appear out of
nothing when that atoms reemits energy and the electron quantum
jumps back down to the lower level). This is the process that
Einstein analyzed in detail in his famous 1916 paper, which set Bose
on his quest for the perfect derivation of Planck’s law. The total
number of photons inside a box decreases as the box is cooled. The
situation for an atomic gas is quite di erent. Atoms cannot just
disappear,2 so in analyzing the atomic gas, unlike the photon gas,
Einstein has to add the constraint that the number of gas particles is
xed. Second, unlike photons, which always move at the speed of
light, gas particles can lose energy simply by slowing down. For an
ideal gas, which is the case Einstein is considering, in fact all the
atomic energy is in the kinetic energy of motion of the atoms.3
With the constraint of a xed number of atoms, Einstein
correctly derives all the fundamental equations of the quantum ideal
gas, which turn out to be substantially more complicated than those
for the photon gas and do not lead to a relatively simple formula
(“equation of state”) analogous to PV = RT, which describes the
classical gas. Thus Einstein has to employ a subtler mode of analysis
of these equations. He identi es a “degeneracy parameter,” a ratio
of variables that, if much larger than one, will lead back to the
classical equation, PV = RT, but, if it approaches one, will lead to a
new and di erent gas law. Thus this parameter measures the
“quantumness” of the gas, and since it decreases with decreasing
temperature, the theory implies that quantum e ects will become

more and more important the colder the gas becomes. To see if
these deviations from the usual law will be observable, he plugs in
numbers and nds that for a typical gas at room temperature this
degeneracy parameter is very large, about 60,000, consistent with
observations that all gases at room temperature obey the classical
law (PV = RT) extremely well, and that the gas molecules obey the
equipartition theorem, Emol = 3kT/2, with no hint of quantum
e ects.
Next he analyzes what form the quantum corrections to the usual
behavior will take if the temperature, and hence the degeneracy
parameter, can be decreased to the point where deviations from
classical behavior are no longer too small to observe. Sure enough,
he nds that the energy per particle begins to drop below the
equipartition value; so some precursor of quantum freezing is
beginning to take place in the gas despite its macroscopic scale.
Thus his results hint that Bose’s statistical method will restore
Nernst’s theorem even for the ideal gas.
It seems unlikely that Einstein realized the full implications of
Bose’s approach when he wrote this rst paper, since when he
introduces Bose’s new counting method, just like Bose, he does not
explain or defend it with even a single sentence. Evidently the
realization of just how strange the implications of this new
statistical theory are had not yet fully dawned on Einstein. Hence
his comment to Ehrenfest, in a letter sent two days after presenting
his paper to the academy, admitting that the essence of the new
approach is “still obscure.” By September, two months later, he
hints in a letter to Ehrenfest that things are becoming clear but that
the implications are so strange as to raise doubts: “the theory is
pretty, but is there also any truth in it?” By early December he was
ready to commit: “The thing with the quantum gas turns out to be
very interesting,” he wrote again to Ehrenfest. “I am increasingly
convinced that very much of what is true and deep is lurking behind
it. I am happily looking forward to the moment when I can quarrel
with you about it.” So what did Einstein realize about Bose’s method
that makes its implications so interesting and deep? How can

something as mundane as a statistical counting method lead to a
revolution in our physical worldview?
Any serious gambler knows that the laws of statistics are laws of
nature, just as surely as is gravitational attraction. Games of chance
are based on systems that are chaotic and unpredictable, such as a
ball bouncing around on a rotating roulette wheel, or a pair of dice
ung forcefully onto a surface. Since each toss is slightly di erent,
and the nal resting position of the dice depends sensitively on the
small details of each throw, these events are e ectively random
processes, in which the probability that each face will turn up is the
same, and equal to one-sixth. Moreover, what face turns up on one
of the dice is completely independent of what face turns up on the
other die. From these simple principles it is possible to work out the
consequences of rolling a pair of dice many times, to the point
where a casino can make an extremely reliable income from dicebased games.
Games of chance, such as dice or cards, are all based on the same
underlying statistical principle: each speci c con guration of the
basic units (cards, dice, coins) is equally likely; this is exactly the
same assumption as underlies the entropy concept in statistical
physics. The atomic world behaves like a huge number of manyfaced dice, constantly being rolled and rerolled; in fact Bose’s
combinatorial formula is essentially a statement about the number
of states available when a huge aggregate of many-sided dice are
thrown. To understand the strangeness of his answer, consider the
simple case of throwing two dice. The available con gurations are
naturally speci ed by a pair of numbers, the number facing upward
on die one and the number facing upwards on die two; for example
(1, 4) is a speci c con guration in which die one shows a 1 and die
two shows a 4. Each of the thirty-six possible pairs [(1, 1), (1, 2), (2,
1), … (5, 6), (6, 6)] is then equally likely to occur. However, the
statistics gets somewhat more interesting when one looks, not at a
speci c con guration, but at the total score in a throw, the sum of
the two numbers de ning a con guration. Now one quickly realizes
that there are six con gurations adding up to seven (i.e., six ways to

roll a seven) and there is only one way to roll a two. Thus the
chance of rolling a seven is 6/36 = 1/6, and of rolling a two is
1/36. These calculations, and all other statistical properties of dice,
follow directly from the fact that there are two distinct, independent
dice, each of which randomly shows one of its faces when thrown,
and that each throw is independent.
Now, if you have a pair of di erent-color dice (e.g., die one red,
die two blue) and you keep track as you roll many times, you will
surely nd that (red = 3, blue = 4) and (red = 4, blue = 3) occur
roughly an equal number of times, and you can tell that some of
your sevens come from (3, 4) and some from (4, 3). However,
suppose someone makes for you a pair of dice so perfectly matched
that they are completely identical to your eye, and you put the dice
in a closed box and shake them before making the throw. In this
case every time you get a four and a three you will not be able to
tell whether it is (3, 4) or (4, 3). Do you expect this to make any
di erence in the probability of getting a seven? Absolutely not. This
probability is a law of physics: there are two distinct, independent
physical possibilities, which the laws of dynamics may or may not
lead to in a given roll, and we must add the probabilities for each to
occur to get the right answer. It matters not at all if we can tell
which possibility actually occurred.
What, then, about the behavior of two atoms (or electrons) being
distributed by some complex microscopic dynamics into, say, six
di erent quantum energy levels? The two atoms are then like two
“quantum dice,” and the energy level each atom occupies is
analogous to the face of the die that comes up. If atoms are
independent, distinct objects, no matter how much they look
identical, one would have to conclude that having atom one in level
three, and atom two in level four, is a di erent possibility from
atom one in four and atom two in three. And therefore that these
two possibilities must both contribute to the number of possible
states (i.e., both contribute to the entropy of the system). One would
be wrong.

This is the mind-bending, if unappreciated, assumption behind
Bose’s method of counting light quanta, which Einstein adopted for
atoms and which he must have fully grasped only sometime after his
rst paper on the atomic ideal gas. The new principle is that, in the
atomic realm, the interchanging of the role of two identical particles does
not lead to a distinct physical state. This has nothing to do with
whether a physicist chooses to regard these states as the same, or
doesn’t know how to distinguish them: they are not distinct. This is
an ontological and not an epistemological assertion.
How do we know this? Consider again our quantum dice.
According to Bose-Einstein statistics, there are now only twenty-one
possible con gurations, not thirty-six. The six doubles are still there
as before [(1, 1), (2, 2) …]. The number of these states didn’t
change when we switched over to quantum dice; even with classical
statistics there is only one way to get snake eyes, or double deuces,
etcetera. But now, for the thirty other con gurations, where the two
numbers are di erent, we identify them pairwise, leaving only
fteen. Con gurations (3, 4) and (4, 3) are merged into a single
entity of “three-four-and-four-three-ness,” and similarly for all the
other unlike pairs. Now, suddenly, our dice behave di erently.
Instead of seven being the most likely score, six, seven, and eight
are all equally likely and have probability 1/7 of occurring. (With
the new rules one might be tempted to sneak a pair of quantum dice
into a classical casino and make a killing.)
But there is a further change in the probabilities, which has a
profound signi cance in physics. With the Bose-Einstein approach,
the probability of rolling doubles has greatly increased. Classically
the chance of rolling doubles is 6/36 = 1/6 = 16.6 percent;
switching to the quantum dice makes it 6/21 = 28.5 percent,
increasing the odds of doubles by more than 70 percent. With BoseEinstein statistics there are fewer con gurations available in which
the particles do di erent things, and as a result the particles have a
tendency to bunch together in the same states! And the more
particles there are, the more there is the tendency to bunch. For
three quantum “dice” the probability of rolling triples is more than

twice as large as it would be if the classical statistics of
distinguishable dice held sway. With a trillion trillion quantum
particles, as in a mole of gas, this e ect is enormous; it literally
changes the behavior of matter.
Fine, but do we really care that much about what happens when
you swap atoms? Well, we should. Because it is very hard to think
of atoms as particles in our usual everyday sense when they lack
this individuality. After all, just as we could imagine painting one
die red and the other blue (i.e., labeling them), can’t we somehow
label atom one and atom two, and distinguish them? No, we can’t
(according to Einstein). Atoms are fundamentally indistinguishable
and impossible to label. Nature is such that they are not separate
entities, with their own independent trajectories through space and
time. They exist in an eerie, fuzzy state of oneness when aggregated.
So the Bose-Einstein statistical worldview, coming from a di erent
direction, reinforces the concept of wave-particle duality, in this
case applied to both light and matter, and heralds the emerging
discovery that the microscopic world exists in a bizarre mixture of
potentiality and actuality.
Einstein lays out this revolutionary idea in his second paper,
read to the Prussian Academy on January 8, 1925, where he also
predicts a totally unexpected condensation phenomenon that would
have a profound in uence on quantum physics up to the present. He
introduces the new paper as follows: “When the Bose derivation of
Planck’s radiation formula is taken seriously, then one is not
permitted to ignore it as a theory of the ideal gas; when it is
correctly applied, the radiation is recognized as a gas of quanta, so
the analogy between the gas of quanta and the gas of molecules
must be a complete one. In the following, the earlier development
will be supplemented by something new, which seems to me to
increase the interest of the subject.”
The interesting “something new” is
rst presented as a
mathematical paradox. In his rst paper he derived an equation
relating the density of the quantum ideal gas to the temperature of
the gas. Upon close inspection one notices an odd feature of this

equation. On the left-hand side of the equation sits the density of
the gas in a container, a quantity that can be increased inde nitely
simply by compressing the volume of the container, which is kept at
a xed temperature.4 But on the right-hand side is a mathematical
expression that varies with temperature but cannot get larger than a
certain maximum value if the temperature is xed. This leads to an
apparent contradiction, as Einstein points out: this equation violates
the “self-evident requirement that the volume and temperature of an
amount of gas can be given arbitrarily.” What happens, he asks,
when at xed temperature one lets the density increase by
compressing it into a smaller volume until the density becomes
greater than the maximum allowed?
Having posed the question, he brilliantly resolves it with a bold
hypothesis: “I maintain that in this case … an increasing number of
the molecules go into the quantum state numbered 1 [the ground
state], the state without kinetic energy…, a separation occurs; a part
[of the gas] ‘condenses,’ the rest remains a ‘saturated ideal gas.’ ”
Here he is making an analogy to an ordinary gas, like water vapor,
which when cooled reaches a temperature at which it begins to
condense partly into a liquid while still retaining a particular ratio
of liquid to vapor.5 The reason that his hypothesis resolves the
paradox is that in deriving the relation of density to pressure in his
original paper he made an innocent mathematical transformation,
which amounted to neglecting the single quantum state of the gas
where each molecule has zero energy.6 Never before in the history
of statistical physics had the neglect of a single state made any
di erence to the value of a thermodynamic property of a gas, such
as its density. On the contrary, the number of states involved, as we
saw earlier, is normally unimaginably large, and physicists routinely
make approximations that neglect billions of states without giving it
a second thought. But Einstein unerringly recognized that in this
new world of Bose-Einstein statistics, this single zero-energy state
would gobble up a macroscopic fraction of all the molecules,
creating a novel quantum “liquid,” now known as a Bose-Einstein
condensate.

The generosity of the “Bose-Einstein” designation is not widely
appreciated, as few physicists realize that Bose said not a word
about the quantum ideal gas in his seminal paper. The paper that
does predict quantum condensation belongs to Einstein alone, and it
is a masterwork. The boldness of the young rebel combines with the
technical virtuosity of the mature creator of general relativity to
reach breathtaking conclusions with complete self-assurance. A
lesser physicist would either not have noticed the subtle
mathematical error introduced by the neglect of a single state or,
even if noticed, would likely have dismissed its logical implications
as so bizarre as to indicate some fundamental error. The reason that
this condensation phenomenon seems so strange, even today, is that
condensation of an ordinary gas is caused by the weak attraction
between the gas molecules, which becomes important only when the
gas is relatively dense. But Einstein is considering the theory of the
ideal gas, in which such molecular interactions are assumed to be
completely absent. His condensation phenomenon is driven purely
by the newly discovered quantum “oneness” of identical particles,
not by a force like electromagnetism, but by this strange statistical
“pseudoforce” that Einstein was the rst to recognize. Proposing it
as a real physical phenomenon was an act of great courage.
Bose-Einstein condensation is now one of the fundamental pillars
of condensed-matter physics; it underlies the phenomena of
superconductivity of solids and super uidity of liquids such as
helium at low temperatures,7 which have been the subject of ve
Nobel prizes. These substances have substantial interaction forces
between atoms and electrons, unlike the ideal gas of Einstein’s
theory, although it is clear theoretically that the “statistical
attraction” of bosonic particles plays the key role in generating their
unique properties. Nonetheless, it was big news and Nobel-worthy
yet again when, in 1995, atomic physicists nally realized a holy
grail of the eld. They created an atomic gas with negligible
interactions, cold enough8 to observe pure Bose-Einstein
condensation—Einstein’s last great experimental prediction, coming
to fruition a lifetime after its rst statement.

And again, as before, Einstein’s progress was a step too far for
the physics world; it was ignored by the leading atomic physicists,
such as Bohr, Sommerfeld, and Max Born, and by the soon-to-befamous Werner Heisenberg and Wolfgang Pauli. Even Einstein’s
admired colleague Planck and his great friend Ehrenfest, the former
student of Boltzmann, thought it was unacceptable; they believed
that the Bose-Einstein statistical method was just plain wrong. In the
condensate paper Einstein responds explicitly to their criticism:
“Ehrenfest and others have reported that in the Bose theory of
radiation and in my [ideal gas theory], the quanta or molecules do
not act in a manner statistically independent of each other … this is
entirely correct…. The formula [for counting states according to
Bose and Einstein] expresses indirectly an implicit hypothesis about
the mutual in uence of the molecules of a totally new and
mysterious kind.” That’s it. Statistical independence (which here
means the classical method of counting con gurations) is out;
statistical attraction is in. Quantum particles bunch; get used to it.
Einstein then goes on to show that only Bose-Einstein statistics
can save two things statistical physicists hold dear: Nernst’s Third
Law of thermodynamics and the additivity of entropy (i.e., when
one combines two systems their total entropy is the sum of their
individual entropies), a less obvious but fundamental requirement
for thermodynamics to make sense. Having carried physics to the
very brink of the new quantum theory, he rests his case.
While Einstein’s breakthrough did not have much impact on the
mainstream of quantum research, a lesser-known but already wellrespected physicist had been following carefully Einstein’s papers on
the quantum ideal gas, the Austrian Erwin Schrödinger, who had
recently been appointed professor of theoretical physics at the
University of Zurich (Einstein’s rst academic position). Schrödinger
had previously worked on both general relativity theory and on the
quantum ideal gas, and he had met Einstein recently in Innsbruck,
shortly after his rst paper on the ideal gas had been published. He
wrote to Einstein in February of 1925, when he did not yet know of
Einstein’s landmark second paper on condensation, expressing

skepticism about the validity of his application of Bose’s method to
atoms in his rst paper. Einstein replied a few weeks later with
characteristic good humor: “your reproach is not unjusti ed,
although I have not made a mistake in my paper…. In the Bose
statistics, which I use, the quanta or molecules are not considered as
being mutually independent objects.” He then drew a small diagram
illustrating the case of just two particles in two states, pointing out
that there is only one con guration in which the particles are in
di erent states instead of two, as there would be in classical
statistics. To Schrödinger, Einstein’s reply was a revelation: “only
through your letter did the uniqueness and originality of your
statistical method of calculation become clear to me,” he wrote in
November of 1925. “I had not grasped it before at all despite the
fact that Bose’s paper had already come out…. [Bose’s work] did not
seem particularly interesting to me. Only your theory of gas
degeneracy is really something fundamentally new.”

FIGURE 25.1. First page of Einstein’s letter to Schrödinger of February 28, 1925 in which
he explains how Bose statistics di ers from classical statistics, using the diagram at the
bottom of the page. The example is equivalent to two quantum coins: on the right Einstein
lists the four states of two ordinary coins, whereas on the left he lists the three states of
quantum coins, since heads-tails and tails-head are indistinguishable quantum
mechanically. Austrian Central Library for Physics.

Schrödinger wanted to follow up on the suggestion, which
Einstein had made at the end of the paper, that the strange statistics

could be understood using the concept of matter waves, recently
introduced by the young French physicist Louis de Broglie. Within
months this newly inspired research direction would fundamentally
change the emerging modern form of quantum theory, and enshrine
Herr Schrödinger in the eternal pantheon of physics.
1

Such extremely low temperatures were now available to physicists since 1908, following
the Nobel Prize–winning research of the Dutch physicist H. Kammerling Onnes on
liquefying and cooling helium. Einstein and Onnes were well acquainted, having met at the
First Solvay Congress, and interacted frequently during Einstein’s regular visits to Leiden.
2

At very high energies there are processes in which massive particles, such as an electron
and a positron, annihilate one another and disappear, but such processes are not relevant
here.
3

It is a good approximation to neglect the interaction energy between atoms, based on the
assumption that the gas is dilute enough that most of the time atoms are well separated, so
that their mutual interaction is weak.
4

The gas can be kept at a xed temperature as its density (and hence its pressure)
increases simply by making the container out of a heat-conducting material and putting it
in contact with a large “bath” that will add or subtract the necessary heat.
5

This state of an ordinary gas-liquid is referred to as “phase-separated,” and the gas is
termed “saturated,” hence Einstein’s use of the term in this new context.
6

Quantum mavens might worry that having a particle at rest in a nite volume violates
the uncertainty principle. They would be right; “zero energy” here means an essentially
in nitesimal energy, much less than the natural thermal energy scale kT, determined by
the macroscopic size of the container for the gas.
7

Superconductivity is a phenomenon whereby, at low temperatures, a solid such as
aluminum conducts electricity with no resistance and hence no dissipation of energy;
super uidity is a similar e ect in liquids, whereby they lose their viscosity and ow
without dissipating energy.
8

The required temperature in these experiments was 170 billionths of a degree above
absolute zero, by far the coldest temperature ever created by man at that time.

CHAPTER 26

THE ROYAL MARRIAGE: E =
mc2 = hυ
I said to myself that classical physics wasn’t su cient, that all of
the ancient edi ce … was shaken and that it was necessary to
reconstruct the edi ce; but I didn’t think it was necessary to
change fundamental notions, I thought that it was by the
introduction of new things, completely unknown, that one would
take into account quanta…. For example by a synthesis between
waves and particles … it was more or less the point of view of
Einstein.
—LOUIS DE BROGLIE
“A younger brother of the de Broglie known to us has
made a very interesting attempt to interpret the Bohr-Sommerfeld
quantization rules in his dissertation. I believe that it is the rst
feeble ray of light to illuminate this, the worst of our physical
riddles. I have also discovered something that supports his
construction.” So Einstein wrote to Lorentz in December of 1924,
just as he was completing his masterpiece on the quantum ideal gas.
In the midst of his cogitations on the meaning of Bose statistics,
during the summer of 1924, a second bolt from the blue singed his
mail slot. This revelation came in the form of a doctoral thesis, sent
to him by his old friend Paul Langevin, the French physicist, with
the somewhat skeptical assessment, “[the thesis] is a bit strange, but
after all, Bohr also was a bit strange, so see if it is worth something
all the same.” Just as with Bose, Einstein was willing to look at this

young man’s ideas with an open mind and recognize the crucial
insight they represented. He wrote back to Langevin with a warm
and eloquent endorsement: “Louis de Broglie’s work has greatly
impressed me. He has lifted a corner of the great veil. In my work I
[have recently] obtained results that seem to con rm his. If you see
him please tell him how much esteem and sympathy I have for
him.”
Louis de Broglie, like Bose, had venerated Einstein from his
earliest exposure to modern physics, but, unlike Bose, he had good
reason to expect that Einstein might someday take his ideas
seriously. Louis’ older brother, Maurice, was one of the most
distinguished experimental physicists in France and had been one of
two scienti c secretaries at the First Solvay Congress of 1911 (hence
Einstein’s allusion to the “de Broglie known to us” in his letter to
Lorentz). Moreover, the de Broglies were an eminent noble family of
France; Maurice and Louis counted among their predecessors
ministers, generals, and famous literary gures. Maurice himself
held the title of Duke de Broglie, whereas Louis had the inherited
rank of Prince of the Holy Roman Empire, awarded to all the direct
descendants of his ancestor Duke Victor-François in reward for his
martial feats, by order of the emperor Francis I.
Louis Victor Pierre Raymond de Broglie was born on August 15,
1892, the youngest of the ve o spring of his father Victor de
Broglie. His brother, Maurice, was the second child, seventeen years
older than Louis and rst son (hence duke). He served as a father
gure and mentor to Louis, particularly after the death of Victor in
1906; “at every stage of my life and career,” Louis wrote to his
brother, “I found you near me as guide and support.” Maurice had
begun a career as a naval o cer in 1895 but, against the wishes of
his family, abandoned this path in 1904 and devoted himself to
science, taking the rather unusual step of installing a private
laboratory in the family town house on the tony Rue Chateaubriand,
adjacent to the Arc de Triomphe. He would become an enormously
in uential gure in French physics, successor to Langevin at the
College de France, and nominated for the Nobel Prize multiple

times, including in the same year, 1925, when his younger brother
was rst nominated.1
Louis’ sister and close companion Pauline described the young
prince glowingly:
this little brother had become a charming child, slender, svelte,
with a small laughing face, eyes shining with mischief, curled
like a poodle…. His gaiety lled the house. He talked all the
time, even at the dinner table, where the most severe injunctions
to silence could not make him hold his tongue…. He had a
prodigious memory … and seemed to have a particular taste for
… political history…. He improvised speeches inspired by
accounts of the newspapers and could recite unerringly complete
lists of the Ministers of the Third Republic…. A great future as a
statesman was predicted for Louis.
After nishing his secondary education in 1909, graduating from
the elite Lycée Janson de Sailly, and obtaining his licence in
historical studies, he was encouraged to “continue and prepare the
diploma in history.” However, this early passion was dying out, and
confusion about his future set in. “I could see that to do that it was
necessary to go often to the library, make a large bibliography and
such things. That didn’t appeal to me too much, and that was the
beginning of the year of my ‘moral crisis.’ ” He studied law for a
year while hesitating “between several intellectual directions … and
[I] wasn’t very much in agreement with my brother, who would
have preferred that I do either the Ecole Polytechnique or study
diplomacy…. I wanted to do neither, and yet I didn’t want to follow
him [into physics], which increased the crisis a bit.” Finally he
committed himself to a course in advanced mathematics, and by the
end of the year, according to his brother, “The hesitations are over,
he has crossed the Rubicon, and the course of his thoughts has
turned towards physics and more particularly theoretical physics.”
The precise timing of this crisis and conversion is not clear, but
it overlapped closely with Maurice’s service as secretary at the First

Solvay Congress, which a orded Louis a unique window into the
ferment of the new atomic theory. De Broglie recalled: “I began to
think about quanta from the moment that my brother gave me the
notes of the Solvay Congress of 1911, probably at the beginning of
1912,” and “with the ardor of my age I became enthusiastically
interested in the problems that had been treated and I promised
myself to devote all my e orts to achieve an understanding of the
mysterious quanta, which Max Planck had introduced ten years
earlier into theoretical physics, but whose deep signi cance had not
yet been grasped.” Two years later, in 1913, he graduated with his
licence de science, having performed brilliantly on his exams. “His
enthusiasm was returning,” Maurice recalled, “with the certainty of
being at last on the right track.”
However, just as the young man was on the verge of entering the
intellectual fray of quantum research, all of Europe was engulfed in
a more primitive con ict, which led to an inde nite extension of the
brief military service to which de Broglie had been called after
graduation. He was eventually assigned to a wireless telegraphy unit
and found himself working underneath the Ei el Tower, where a
transmitter had been installed. And while his brother recalled that
Louis “regretted the interruption of his meditations” on quantum
theory and complained of “inspiration broken to pieces,” Louis
himself spoke of the experience somewhat fondly, “because that put
me in relation with … real things. That made a certain impression,
and led me to examine quite closely all the theories of the
propagation of waves, all the theories of electronics … that certainly
contributed greatly to clarifying my ideas on all this.”
Decommissioned in 1919, de Broglie was ready to begin his quest in
earnest.
De Broglie was determined to be a theorist, unlike his brother,
but this was not nearly as felicitous a choice in France as in the
German-speaking countries of Europe, which were leading the
abstract developments of quantum theory. De Broglie’s close friend
and fellow theorist Leon Brillouin recalled, “There was really no
career open for a theoretical physicist in the French organization.

People who had curiosity for theory would go right away into pure
mathematics…. Many of my colleagues told me ‘Are you crazy? To
go into theoretical physics, there is no future.” Nonetheless
Brillouin, and de Broglie, joined the small group around Paul
Langevin who were working on quantum theory.
De Broglie’s rst thought was to focus on the theory of light
quanta, which, unlike most other physicists, he had believed in
since his rst exposure to Einstein’s work in 1912.
I never had any doubt at this time about the existence of
photons. I considered that Einstein had discovered them, that
they raised many di culties … but that in the end this was a
problem to resolve, that one could not deny the existence of
photons…. It must be noted that I was very young. I had not
made any theoretical works and for that reason was not as
attached to electromagnetic theory, as was Langevin…. Thus, I
accepted this as something that must be required.
In addition, his brother Maurice had been very directly grappling
with the particulate properties of light in his extensive research on
the x-ray photoelectric e ect. Louis and Maurice collaborated on the
interpretation of these experiments in terms of Bohr’s theory during
1920 and 1921; particularly striking was the fact that the x-ray
radiation appeared capable of giving all its energy to a pointlike
electron, an observation very di cult to reconcile with a picture of
the x-rays as extended, spherically expanding waves. When Maurice
spoke of his experiments at the 1921 Solvay Congress (which
Einstein had skipped), he concluded that the radiation “must be
corpuscular … or if undulatory, its energy must be concentrated in
points on the surface of the wave.”
De Broglie’s rst signi cant contribution had a motivation
remarkably similar to that of Bose: to derive “a number of known
results of the theory of radiation … without the intervention of
electromagnetic theory” (i.e., without using classical physics). “The
hypothesis we adopt is that of light quanta.” However, unlike every
other physicist working on the quantum problem, de Broglie was

convinced that the key to unlocking it lay in the appropriate use of
relativity theory, which he described as Einstein’s “incomparable
insight.” Thus, in the second paragraph of the paper, he introduces a
very peculiar notion, that quanta are to be thought of as “atoms” of
light, with a very small but nonzero mass. In almost two decades of
quantum research neither Einstein nor anyone else in the eld had
made such an outré suggestion. Photons (quanta) were conceived to
have energy, E = hυ, and momentum, p = hυ/c, but their energy
and momentum was not accompanied by a rest mass, precisely
because photons, by de nition, move at the speed of light and can
never be at rest in any frame of reference. Nonetheless de Broglie
asserts that photons should be conceived of as having a rest mass
which satis es Einstein’s most famous equation, E = mc2! Hence, he
states, combining this with the Planck relation, E = hυ, this mass
must equal hυ/c2. Never mind that this mass would then vary
continuously with the frequency of light, which seemed very odd—
in the current work he simply assumes that this mass is “in nitely
small,” while the speed of the photon is “in nitely close” to c, so
that the usual relation E/c = p for photons still holds, to a very
good approximation.2
It must be noted that in the modern quantum theory the mass of
the photon is precisely zero, and a nite photon mass played no role
in the rst full formulations of quantum mechanics, which emerged
a mere four years later. Thus this forced marriage of the two most
famous equations of modern physics (E = mc2 and E = hυ) ended in
a speedy divorce. However, in the rst paper de Broglie uses this
hypothesis only to rederive a known result of electromagnetic
theory, that light exerts pressure and that this pressure is half the
value one nds for ordinary nonrelativistic particles.3 From this
point on in the paper he uses standard statistical and
thermodynamic relations, very much as in Einstein’s work of 1902–
1906, to derive the law for blackbody radiation, arriving not at
Planck’s formula but rather at Wien’s law.4 The reason for this is
that he has, like so many before, assumed that the quanta are
statistically independent, and, as was discussed in connection with

the work of Bose, this assumption inevitably leads to Wien’s
approximation to the Planck law. He misses completely the strange
statistical attraction that Bose stumbled upon, and Einstein would
elucidate, two years later. The paper is signi cant for two reasons.
First, de Broglie introduces the method of counting single photon
states using units de ned by Planck’s constant, which Bose would
rediscover a couple of years later.5 Second, de Broglie expressly
assumes that the formulas of relativity theory are used for “atoms of
light” and thus asserts that relativistic mechanics is of central
importance in quantum theory, whereas previously it played a very
minor role. This novel point of view would shortly lead him to a
historic breakthrough.
After his initial foray into the theory of light quanta in 1922, de
Broglie became convinced that there must be some symmetry
between the behavior of “atoms of light” and other massive
particles, such as electrons or atoms. According to his friend
Brillouin, he was fascinated by the experimental images of
radioactive decay processes, in which massive particles (e.g.,
electrons and positrons) are emitted from the atomic nucleus and
follow curved tracks due to the force exerted by a magnetic eld,
while the simultaneously emitted photon makes a straight track,
since it lacks electric charge. Apparently de Broglie intuitively felt,
“Well, all this must be very similar. Either they are all waves or they
are all particles … [so he tried] to see if he couldn’t make
everything waves.” De Broglie recalled that the key ideas
“developed rapidly in the summer of 1923,” perhaps in July. “I got
the idea that one had to extend [wave-particle] duality to the
material particles, especially to electrons.” In September and
October of that year he submitted three short notes for publication,
which contained “the essential things” that later entered into his
thesis.
In pondering how to associate a wave with material particles, de
Broglie had been struggling with an apparent paradox. Just as had
he had for photons, he persisted in combining the two great
equations of Einstein and Planck and hence associating a frequency

with the particle’s rest mass: m = hυ/c2, but now he took the bold
step of applying this formula to electrons, for which the mass was
not unmeasurably small. De Broglie insisted that this was “a meta
law of Nature, [that] to each … proper mass m, one may associate a
periodic phenomenon of frequency υ = mc2/h.” In other words de
Broglie postulated a sort of internal “vibration” of every particle,
which acted like a ticking clock, even when it was at rest. Moreover,
if this is so, reasoned de Broglie, then when the particle moves at
velocity v, its “ticking” must slow down, because Einstein’s theory
of relativity predicts the universal e ect of time dilation: clocks are
measured to run more slowly when in motion relative to an
observer. So the moving particle will appear to vibrate at a lower
frequency,6 υ1, than it does when at rest.

However, de Broglie at the same time considered the most basic
postulate of relativity theory, that the laws of physics are the same
in all frames of reference, and hence that the energy of the moving
particle must still be related to some frequency via Planck’s constant
(i.e., E = hυ must still hold when the particle is moving). But since
the energy of the particle is larger in the frame in which it is moving
(it has kinetic energy, ½ mv2, in addition to its rest mass energy),
then to satisfy the Planck relation it must have a higher frequency,7
υ2, than its “rest frequency,” υ. So there were two frequencies one
should associate with the particle motion, one larger than its rest
frequency, one smaller; which one was physically relevant?
Both, was de Broglie’s answer. While the particle is moving, “it
glides on its wave, so that the internal vibration of the particle (υ1)
is in phase with the vibration of the wave (υ2), at the point where it
nds itself.” The “ ctive wave” that guides the particle moves at just
the right speed so that the wave peak coincides with the peak of the
particle oscillations; the particle is like a lucky surfer, permanently
attached to the crest of the perfect wave. De Broglie showed that,
for this to be so, the velocity of the “phase wave” (as he termed his
ctive waves) must have a speci c value, Vphase = c2/v, which is
faster than the speed of light.8 Because the phase waves moved

faster than light, they could carry no energy, according to relativity
theory, but served only to guide the particle motion.
So that is de Broglie’s picture: every particle has some
unspeci ed internal oscillation, which must remain in phase with a
mysterious steering wave that directs its motion but which moves
ahead faster than light so as to remain always “in resonance” with
the particle’s oscillation. Even by the standards of the new quantum
theory, this was a rather wild invention, and, if anything, Langevin
greatly understated the case when he told Einstein it was “a bit
strange.”
But de Broglie had at least one further result that supported his
extreme conjectures. He took this picture and applied it to an
electron circulating around a hydrogen atom. The electron would
move around in a circular orbit, continually emitting these phase
waves, which would zoom ahead of the particle and lap the particle
almost 19,000 times for each electronic circuit. Again he asked the
question: what was required so that each time a wave crest and the
particle coincided, the particle oscillation and the wave oscillation
were in phase? Almost miraculously, he was able to show that this
requirement was equivalent to the Bohr-Sommerfeld rule for the
allowed electron orbits in hydrogen.9 It was this result that
apparently impressed Einstein, who referred to it, in his paper on
Bose-Einstein condensation, as “a very remarkable geometric
interpretation of the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rule.”
While de Broglie’s key ideas were developed in the fall of 1923,
he prepared a longer and more comprehensive document as his
thesis in the spring of 1924, and gave it to his adviser, Langevin,
who clearly was concerned about whether by accepting the work he
would be endorsing nonsense. “It looks far-fetched to me,” was his
initial reaction, shared with a colleague. At some point in the spring
Langevin spoke to Einstein, who was intrigued and agreed to look at
a copy. Einstein “read my thesis during the summer of 1924” de
Broglie recalled, and wrote the very favorable report quoted above.
“As M. Langevin had great regard for Einstein, he counted this

opinion greatly, and this changed a bit his opinion with regard to
my thesis.”
De Broglie then defended his thesis in November of 1924 before
a distinguished but bewildered “jury” (as it is termed in France),
chaired by the future Nobel laureate Jean Perrin and including the
famous mathematician Elie Cartan, the eminent crystallographer
Charles Mauguin, and his adviser, Langevin. While their verdict was
positive and de Broglie was congratulated for his “remarkable
mastery,” a student who attended the thesis defense later remarked,
“never has so much gone over the heads of so many.” Maurice de
Broglie sought a candid opinion from Perrin and was told, “all I can
tell you is that your brother is very intelligent.”
De Broglie’s thesis had come to Einstein’s attention at the perfect
time. Einstein was now deep into his second paper analyzing the
statistical properties of the quantum atomic gas. And in addition to
his realization that the principle of indistinguishability of particles is
implicit in Bose statistics, and the possibility of quantum
condensation this implied, he had made one more major
mathematical discovery. Just as he had done for the gas of light
quanta, which he had analyzed in the seminal work of 1909, he now
looked at the uctuations of the energy in a particular volume of the
quantum gas of particles. For both the photon gas and for a gas of
atoms in a box, the energy in a small region of the box can vary
randomly in time, while maintaining the same energy on average.
This is simply a re ection of the ceaseless give-and-take that
corresponds to thermal equilibrium. Einstein’s earliest insight into
the wave-particle duality of light had come in 1909, when he
derived a formula for the typical magnitude of these energy
uctuations. He found that it consisted of two contributions, one of
which could be explained by the interference of light waves, but the
other of which looked exactly like the uctuations expected from a
gas of particles with energy E = hυ. It was this latter, particulate
term that was a revelation in 1909, supporting Einstein’s hypothesis
of light quanta and prompting him to declare that the future
quantum theory would involve a “fusion” of the wave and particle

concepts. Now, after adopting Bose statistics, he nally had the
correct theory to evaluate the same quantity for the atomic gas. He
found that exactly the same structure occurs: the uctuations are the
sum of two terms, a “particle term” and a “wave term.” But in this
case it is the “wave term” that is the surprise.
This parallelism between atoms and light impressed Einstein
greatly because, as he says in his second quantum gas paper, “I
believe that it is more than just an analogy, since a material particle
… can be represented by a … wave eld, as de Broglie has stated in
a remarkable thesis.” He continues: “this oscillating eld—whose
physical nature is still obscure—must, in principle permit itself to be
demonstrated by phenomena corresponding to its motion. So a
beam of gas molecules travelling through an opening must
experience a bending, which is analogous to that of a beam of
light.” That was the key to testing this extension of wave-particle
duality. Whereas before, one was looking for particulate behavior of
light waves, such as the localized collisions of photons and atoms in
the photoelectric e ect, now one should look for wave behavior of
particles: a stream of atoms should interfere with itself as it passed
near an edge, exhibiting the wave phenomenon known as
di raction. Einstein began suggesting such a search to physicists in
September of 1924, shortly after reading de Broglie’s thesis.10
Einstein’s endorsement and extension of de Broglie’s matter wave
concept was decisive in bringing this idea under serious study in the
physics community. “The scienti c world of the time hung on every
one of Einstein’s words, for he was then at the peak of his fame,” de
Broglie noted. “By stressing the importance of wave mechanics, the
illustrious scientist had done a great deal to hasten its development.
Without his paper my thesis might not have been appreciated until
very much later.” Even with his paper the thesis was viewed with
suspicion; a student of Sommerfeld’s recalled, “the paper of de
Broglie was studied [in Munich] too; everyone had objections (they
were not very di cult to nd), and no one took the idea seriously.”
Thus the search to observe matter waves, which began almost

immediately after Einstein’s second paper on the quantum gas, was
mainly pursued in Einstein’s name.
Walter Elsasser, the very rst experimenter to nd evidence in
this direction, illustrates this with the introduction to his initial
paper: “By way of a detour through statistical mechanics, Einstein
has recently arrived at a physically very remarkable result. Namely
he makes plausible the assumption that a wave eld is to be
associated with every translational motion of a material particle….
The hypothesis of such waves, already advanced by de Broglie
before Einstein, is so strongly supported by Einstein’s theory that it
seems appropriate to look for experimental tests for it.” Within two
years these tests rendered an unambiguous verdict: electrons beams
do show wavelike interference. This discovery was so striking that
de Broglie, with Einstein’s strong support, received the Nobel Prize
in Physics in 1929, a mere four years after his work became widely
known.
But had this enormous success corroborated de Broglie’s speci c
model, involving superluminal phase waves? Not at all. Almost no
trace of this concept survives in modern quantum mechanics, and
the vast majority of contemporary physicists are completely
unaware of the basis on which de Broglie argued for matter waves.
The only equation that survives from de Broglie’s thesis work is so
simple that Einstein could have written it down any time after
1905.11 This is the famous relation λ = h/p = h/mv, which relates
the momentum, p = mv, of a massive particle to its “De Broglie
wavelength.” It is obtained in a few lines by an extension, from light
quanta to material particles, of Einstein’s equation E= hυ.12 This
formula, correctly interpreted, is essential to modern quantum
theory but arises there without any appeal to relativity theory or de
Broglie’s phase waves.
De Broglie himself, having completed his thesis by age thirtyone, never again made a fundamental contribution to physics,
although he remained active in research, unlike Bose. He was an
“uninspiring” classroom teacher, who started and ended his lectures
precisely on time and permitted no questions during or after them.

The research seminars he organized for many years were stilted
a airs, with only brief open interchanges, described as “dry and
devoid of passion.” The disciples that congregated around him were
“not of the highest intellectual caliber” and created “an atmosphere
of admiration, not to say adulation.” For example, it was considered
bad form to refer to “quantum mechanics,” even after it became the
standard term; one was supposed rather to say “wave mechanics,”
as homage to de Broglie’s seminal role. His research career spanned
more than fty years (he lived to age ninety- ve), and it is now
widely acknowledged that his in uence was not very positive for
the development of theoretical physics in France.

FIGURE 26.1. Prince Louis De Broglie circa 1930. Academie des Sciences, Paris, courtesy
AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.

For much of his life de Broglie worked diligently within the
standard quantum theory, which emerged from the work of
Schrödinger, Heisenberg, and Bohr, although he initially opposed it
in 1927. Then, in 1952, at age sixty, he again rejected this approach
and joined Einstein in searching for a new and more aesthetically
satisfying theory. In 1954, a year before his death, Einstein wrote

touchingly to de Broglie, “Yesterday I read … your article on quanta
and determinism, and your ideas, so clear, have given me great
pleasure…. I must resemble the bird from the desert, the ostrich,
hiding its head in the sands of Relativity rather than to face the
malicious Quanta. Indeed, exactly like you, I am convinced that one
must look for a substructure, a necessity that the present quantum
theory hides.”
1

Unlike Louis, Maurice was never awarded the prize, although his research was
prominently cited in the 1922 prize, awarded to Niels Bohr.
2

Note that c here can no longer be thought of as the speed of light, but rather the limiting
velocity of light as its frequency and hence mass goes to zero.
3
4

When measured appropriately, in terms of its energy density.

De Broglie mentions in passing that if one were to consider not just isolated atoms of
light but “a mixture of monatomic, diatomic, triatomic” molecules of light, Planck’s law
could be obtained, but then dismisses this as requiring “some arbitrary hypotheses.” He
and others followed up this idea, but it was superseded by the concepts of Bose statistics.
5

Like Bose, de Broglie then nds his answer is o by a factor of 2, and he needs to insert
this factor “by hand” to account for the two possible polarizations of light (which is a
concept of classical electromagnetism, not present in the theory of light quanta at that
time).
6
7

According to relativity theory, υ1 = υ0(1 –v2/c2)1/2.

Again from relativity theory, υ2 = υ0(1 –v2/c2)−1/2, so it is higher than υ0 by just the
same factor that υ1 is lower.
8

Since any massive particle’s velocity must be less than the speed of light, the wave
velocity, Vphase = (c/v)c, is necessarily greater than the speed of light.
9

Suitably generalized to include relativistic e ects.

10

De Broglie also had suggested such a search, for interference of electrons, roughly a year
earlier.
11

Much later, under direct questioning from the physicist I. I. Rabi, Einstein allowed that
he did indeed think of the famous equation λ = h/p for matter waves before de Broglie but
didn’t publish because “there was no experimental evidence” for it.
12

The logic is as follows: for a photon, E = hυ, and for light waves E = pc. If we assume
both relations hold and use the relationship of wave frequency to wavelength, υ = c/λ, we
get λ = h/p. If we assume the same relation holds for massive particles moving slowly
compared with the speed of light, so that p = mv, we nd λ = h/mv. The full quantum
derivation of this is based on Schrödinger’s equation and doesn’t rely on the assumptions
that are used in this simple argument.

CHAPTER 27

THE VIENNESE POLYMATH

Physics does not consist only of atomic research, science does not
consist only of physics, and life does not consist only of science.
—ERWIN SCHRÖDINGER
“When you began this work you had no idea that
anything so clever would come out of it, had you?” This question
was addressed to the Austrian theorist Erwin Schrödinger sometime
in the fall of 1926. The questioner was a young female admirer of
the thirty-nine-year-old physicist, whose unusual marriage allowed
for many such “friendships.” The work in question was that leading
to the most famous equation of quantum mechanics, the “wave
equation,” named after its inventor. Schrödinger’s scienti c
colleagues were less restrained in their praise. The reserved Planck
e used, “I have read your article the way an inquisitive child listens
in suspense to the solution of a puzzle which he has been bothered
about for a long time.” Einstein, who learned of the work from
Planck, wrote simply, “the idea of your article shows real genius.”
At the time of this seminal work, Schrödinger was a professor at
the University of Zurich, occupying the very same chair that
Einstein had once held as his rst academic position.1 Schrödinger
was in the midst of what he called his “First Period of Roaming,”
during which he moved between various positions, as had Einstein
fteen years earlier, ascending the academic hierarchy. Indeed, in
1927, after the great triumph of his wave equation, Schrödinger
would end up as Einstein’s colleague in Berlin, after receiving the
signal honor of succession to the chair of the recently retired Planck.

Even before that, Einstein and Schrödinger had become allies in the
struggle and competition to create the new atomic theory, and they
shared certain intellectual habits. Schrödinger, like Einstein, did
almost all his research alone, unlike the other school of quantum
theory involving Bohr, Sommerfeld, Max Born, Werner Heisenberg,
Pascual Jordan, and Wolfgang Pauli, who primarily worked
collaboratively. Also, Schrödinger and Einstein had a sincere respect
for and interest in philosophy,2 and they shared a similar
philosophy of science, in uenced by the positivism of Ernst Mach
but with a strong note of idealism.
However, unlike Einstein, Schrödinger had been appointed at
Zurich primarily for his breadth of knowledge, outstanding
mathematical abilities, and brilliant intellect—not because of any
breakthrough attached to his name. In 1926, when he nally wrote
his name into the history of science, he was already thirty-nine
years old, well past the age when radical breakthroughs are
expected from a theoretical physicist. And in fact his style of
research had never before involved a daring leap into the unknown;
instead his modus operandi was to criticize and improve the work of
others.
In my scienti c work … I have never followed one main line, …
my work … is not entirely independent, since if I am to have an
interest in a question, others must also have one. My word is
seldom the rst, but often the second, and may be inspired by a
desire to contradict or to correct, but the consequent extension
may turn out to be more important than the correction.
In a sense, his work culminating in the wave equation was in
that vein, building strongly on the insights of Einstein and de
Broglie, but in this instance the extension was of historic
consequence. In fact the state of quantum theory in 1925 called for
just such an outsider, a critic who understood the two main lines of
research, the Bohr-Sommerfeld atomic theory and the Einstein–
Bose–De Broglie statistical theory of quanta, but who had a
sentimental attachment to neither.

Erwin Schrödinger himself, while a man of great personal
magnetism, was not known for his sentimental attachments. In his
autobiographical sketch, written in his seventies, he re ected that
he’d had only one close friend in his entire life and that he had
“often been accused of irtatiousness, instead of true friendship.”
Flirtatiousness understates his behavior with respect to the opposite
sex. He ends his sketch with the most titillating of disclaimers. “I
must refrain from drawing a complete picture of my life, as I am not
good at telling stories; besides, I would have to leave out a very
substantial part of the portrait, i.e. that dealing with my
relationships with women.” Thus we do not learn, for example, the
name of the mystery woman (not his wife) who accompanied him
on the Christmas ski vacation of 1925 during which the wave
equation was discovered.3
Born in 1887 and raised in an imperial Vienna that represented
the owering of art and culture at the turn of the century, Erwin
Schrödinger was closer to Einstein’s generation than he was to the
rising cohort of brilliant young theorists (Heisenberg, Pauli, Dirac)4
who would join him in driving the quantum revolution to
completion. An only child, raised by a doting mother and aunts, he
showed great intellectual talent from an early age. His father had
studied chemistry at university, and pursued serious interests in art
and botany, but contented himself with running the family linoleum
business, while investing his son with his unrealized professional
aspirations. Homeschooled until the age of eleven, Schrödinger then
attended the elite Akademisches Gymnasium, Vienna’s oldest
secondary school, where he was the top student in his class for eight
straight years. “I was a good student in all subjects, loved
Mathematics and Physics, but also the strict logic of the ancient
grammars (Latin and Greek),” he recalled. Unlike Einstein, the
independent-minded Schrödinger managed to get along with his
teachers and, in looking back, could “only nd words of praise for
my old school.” His intellectual facility astonished his classmates,
one of whom recounted: “I can’t recall a single instance in which
our Primus5 ever could not answer a question.”

When he matriculated at the University of Vienna in 1906, his
brilliance was already widely known; a friend, Hans Thirring, recalls
encountering a striking blond young man in the mathematics library
and being told by a fellow student, sotto voce, “das ist der
Schrödinger.”6 Their
rst meeting instilled in Thirring the
conviction that “this man is really somebody special … a ery spirit
at work.” By the time Schrödinger reached adulthood his erudition
was legendary; he lectured comfortably in German, English, French,
and Spanish, recited and wrote poetry (even publishing a volume
late in life), and became a true expert in the philosophy of
Schopenhauer and the Hindu spiritual texts, the Upanishads.
Schrödinger “would translate Homer into English from the original
Greek, or old Provencal poems into German,” and insisted
throughout his life that study of the ancient Greek thinkers was not
something for his “hours of leisure” but was “justi ed by the hope
of some gain in the understanding of modern science.” It was said of
Schrödinger’s physics articles that “if it were not for the
mathematics, they could be read with pleasure as literary essays.”
After settling on physics as his main focus at the end of his
undergraduate years, Schrödinger went on to graduate work,
primarily in experimental physics or in theoretical topics relating to
the experimental work going on at the university. “I learnt to
appreciate the signi cance of measuring. I wish there were more
theoretical physicists who did.” However, by the end of this period,
around 1914, when he obtained his habilitation, he had decided
that he was personally unsuited to be an experimenter and that
Austrian experimental physics was second rate. Nonetheless he
continued to do some laboratory work, and his reputation as a
broadly trained physicist, conversant with both experiment and
theory, would be of great value when he began searching for
academic positions.
Schrödinger was poised to dive into the rushing currents of
change in theoretical physics in 1914, with Bohr’s atomic theory
newly hatched and Einstein’s general relativity on the near horizon.
But, as it did for de Broglie, the Great War intervened. Schrödinger

was called into service as an artillery o cer, and he served in that
capacity for three years before being transferred to the meteorology
service. In general Schrödinger’s military assignments were not
among the most challenging or dangerous, and he mainly su ered
from boredom, and a certain degree of depression, during this
period. However, early on in his tour of duty, in October of 1915, he
was caught up in one of the major battles around the Isonzo River
on the Italian front and received a citation for “his fearlessness and
calmness in the face of recurrent heavy enemy artillery re.”
During his war service he wrote to his many women friends, but
only one visited him at the front, a young woman from Salzburg
named Annemarie Bertel, whom he had met through friends in
1913. She admired and adored Schrödinger from their rst meeting:
“I was impressed by him because, rst of all, he was very goodlooking.” They would marry in 1920, and within a few years the
marriage evolved into a close, but nonmonogamous, relationship,
with both fairly openly engaging in a airs, although Erwin was
certainly the more active in this regard. For Annie (as she was
known), this was the price of involvement with a great man. “I
know it would be easier to live with a canary bird than with a race
horse. But I prefer the race horse.”
When Schrödinger returned full time to physics research in 1918,
he was not particularly focused on the problems of quantum theory.
He had learned theoretical physics at university from Fritz
Hasenohrl, a leading disciple of the great Boltzmann, who along
with Maxwell and Gibbs founded statistical mechanics. Boltzmann
had died by suicide in 1906, the same year that Schrödinger began
his studies; but his atomic worldview now prevailed; it had become
a pillar of modern physics. “No perception in physics has ever
seemed more important to me than that of Boltzmann,” Schrödinger
recounted, “despite Planck and Einstein.”
During the war he had lled several notebooks with statistical
calculations very much in the spirit of Einstein’s early work on
Brownian motion and di usion. Upon returning to civilian life he
published two papers based on these notes, the second of which,

dealing with uctuations in the rate of radioactive decay, is the
longest article he ever produced, stretching to sixty journal pages. It
was a tour de force of applied mathematics, and it announced to the
world that he was to be taken seriously as a statistical physicist. In
the same period he also published his rst paper on quantum
theory, focusing on further developments in Einstein’s quantum
theory of speci c heat, as well as two short papers analyzing the
equations of general relativity. In yet another nod to Einstein’s
work, in 1919, he performed an experiment trying to distinguish
between the wave and particle theories of light, using a very small
source. The experiment was similar in a general sense to the failed
experiment that Einstein proposed in 1921 (his “monumental
blunder”) and gave similarly equivocal results.
Schrödinger was establishing his research style as a critic and
polymath, one able to work expertly in many sub elds at once, who
took the ideas of others and either demolished them or clari ed and
extended them. Although his radiation experiment had not had been
a major success, it resulted in an invitation from Sommerfeld to visit
Munich, where he became enamored of the (old) quantum theory of
atomic spectra, due to Bohr and elaborated in great detail by the
“beautiful work” of the Sommerfeld school.7 By 1920 he had been
appointed full professor at Breslau, and he threw himself into
research on atomic spectra, something Einstein had never been
willing to do. By January of 1921 he had produced a step forward in
the theory of alkali atoms, leading to a correspondence with Bohr,
who wrote: “[your paper] interested me very much … some time
ago I made exactly the same consideration.”8 He would continue to
make respectable, but not decisive, contributions to the BohrSommerfeld theory regularly, into the fateful year of 1925, when
the old theory would be overthrown by two revolutions, one of his
own making.

FIGURE 27.1. Erwin Schrödinger circa 1925. AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Physics
Today Collection.

By 1922 he had been recruited to Zurich and was a certi ed
expert in both modern quantum theory and modern statistical
physics, but still a virtuoso without a masterpiece of his own.
Almost all his work for the next four years would be on either
atomic spectra or the statistical mechanics of gases; surprisingly, it
was the latter that led him to his great discovery, with more than a
nudge from Albert Einstein. As we have seen, in February of 1925,
shortly after the publication of Einstein’s key paper on the quantum
theory of the ideal gas and Bose-Einstein condensation, Schrödinger
wrote to Einstein respectfully but rmly suggesting that his paper
contained an error. When, in his reply, Einstein explained to him
how the new statistics worked, the scales dropped from
Schrödinger’s eyes, and he was entranced by the “originality of
[Einstein’s] statistical method.” He immediately set out to deepen
his understanding of this new form of statistical physics, which he

would soon describe as “a radical departure from the BoltzmannGibbs type of statistics.”
By July of 1925 he had produced a typically insightful but
incremental response, a paper titled “Remarks on the Statistical
De nition of Entropy for the Ideal Gas,” which contrasted Planck’s
de nition of entropy for the gas with that of Einstein. Planck for
some time had been suggesting a weaker form of indistinguishability
of gas particles than that of Bose and Einstein,9 which was su cient
to save Nernst’s law but didn’t lead to the weird statistical attraction
that is implied by Bose-Einstein statistics. Schrödinger realized that
Planck’s method was illogical because it got rid of too many states.
Recall that Bose-Einstein’s new counting method, when applied to
dice, would insist that the two dice “states” (4, 3) and (3, 4) are just
one state, so that for each such unequal pair one should count only
one state, not two, reducing the number of states and hence the
entropy of the system. However, there is no such reduction for
doubles (there is only one way to roll snake eyes); so there is no
reduction in the number of double “states” for quantum versus
classical dice. Yet Planck’s method, once you understood it deeply,
boiled down to counting each double as only half a state, which was
clearly wrong. Schrödinger says exactly this: “in order that two
molecules are able to exchange their roles, they must really have
di erent roles … one is [then] almost automatically led to that
de nition of the entropy of the ideal gas which has recently been
introduced by A. Einstein [Bose-Einstein statistics].” In a quaint
custom of the time, this rather signi cant criticism of Planck was
read to the Prussian Academy by Planck himself, on behalf of
Schrödinger.
Einstein was impressed by this exegesis, which he himself
apparently had not appreciated; in September of 1925 he wrote to
Schrödinger again: “I have read with great interest your
enlightening considerations on the entropy of ideal gases.” He then
sketched for Schrödinger another approach to the ideal gas problem,
which he had worked through crudely, leading to results that he
found puzzling. When Schrödinger wrote back to Einstein on

November 3, in addition to applauding Einstein’s development of
Bose statistics he proposed to carry through Einstein’s alternative
approach in detail, which he was able to do in a scant few days. He
was less troubled than Einstein by the answer he found, which
con rmed Einstein’s original argument, and proposed a joint
publication: “the basic idea is yours … and you must decide about
the further fate of your child…. I need not emphasize the fact that it
would be a great honor for me to be allowed to publish a joint paper
with you.”
A touching exchange ensued, in which Einstein insists he should
not be a coauthor, “since you have performed the whole work; I feel
like an ‘exploiter,’ as the socialists call it.” Schrödinger immediately
demurs: “not even jokingly would I have … thought of you as an
“exploiter” … one might say: ‘when kings go building, wagoners
have work.’ ” On December 4 he sent Einstein a complete draft of
the paper with the second author slot blank, but Einstein presented
the paper to the Prussian Academy without his own signature.
Einstein’s intuition was again right; there were subtle errors in the
reasoning, and the approach itself turned out to be unwieldy, in
contrast to Einstein’s rst approach, which is still found in modern
texts.
However, only a couple of weeks later, Schrödinger had yet
another ideal gas paper in the works, which led directly to the wave
equation. Just prior to his letter to Einstein in early November,
Schrödinger had nally managed to get hold of de Broglie’s thesis,
which he had sought because of Einstein’s strong endorsement of it
in his work on the quantum gas. Having now got hold of the thesis,
Schrödinger tells Einstein that “because of it, section 8 [the waveparticle section] of your second [quantum gas] … paper has also
become completely clear to me for the rst time.” Two weeks later,
writing to another physicist, he remarks that he is very much
inclined toward a “return to wave theory.”
His nal ideal gas paper, submitted December 15, just before he
left for his Christmas holiday, was a last e ort to digest Einstein’s
new quantum statistics; it is titled simply “On Einstein’s Gas

Theory.” He sets out to derive the same answers as Einstein without
accepting the strange state counting of Bose, which he thinks
requires too great a “sacri cium intellectus.” The way out, he says,
is “nothing else but taking seriously the De Broglie–Einstein wave
theory of the moving particles, according to which the particles are
nothing more than a kind of ‘white crest’ on a background of wave
radiation.” He then formulates the mathematical problem di erently
from Einstein but shows how to reach exactly the same nal
equations. From the perspective of a modern physicist10 the two
calculations are equivalent and have the same meaning, but
Schrödinger felt that by interpreting the fundamental objects as
waves instead of as particles the weirdness of indistinguishability
was somehow made more palatable. He concludes by speaking of
the particles as “signals” or “singularities” embedded in the wave,
highly reminiscent of Einstein’s failed ideas of 1909–1910 and his
later idea of “ghost elds” guiding the particles developed in the
early 1920s. Except that Schrödinger clearly now thinks that the
particles are the “ghosts,” the ephemera, since by viewing waves as
fundamental he has “explained” Bose-Einstein statistics in a natural
way. Later he would say, “wave mechanics was born in statistics.”
A few days before Christmas 1925 Schrödinger set o to a
familiar mountain lodge in the Swiss village of Arosa, determined to
nd a new equation to describe these matter waves. Although he
took his skis (he was an expert alpinist) and was accompanied by an
unnamed “old girlfriend,”11 it seems that this trip was really focused
on wave equations. De Broglie, despite Einstein’s praise, had not
produced a new governing equation, similar to Maxwell’s
electromagnetic wave equation, that could predict or explain the
remaining mysteries of the atom. He had produced some suggestive
mathematical relations, which made contact with the old quantum
theory of Bohr and Sommerfeld, but only at the most elementary
level. The central mystery of quantum theory, quantization, was not
really resolved by de Broglie’s work. Why wasn’t nature continuous?
Why are only certain energies allowed for electrons bound to atomic
nuclei?

Schrödinger saw an answer. Classical waves, or vibrations, in a
con ned medium have certain natural constraints on their
properties. Consider a violin string of a certain length, L, clamped
down at each end. The notes it can play arise from vibrations of the
strings; these vibrations are waves of sideways displacement in the
string, but they cannot have a continuously varying wavelength as is
possible for waves in an open (essentially in nite) medium. The
longest wavelength, λ, they can have is twice the string length. Why
is this the longest? First, consider that, for any wave on a string, the
string’s displacement must be zero at the points where it is clamped
down. The simplest form of displacement the string can have away
from these xed points is for it to be displaced everywhere in the
same sideways direction (left or right) at a given instant, so that the
maximum displacement is in the middle and it decreases back to
zero at both clamped ends. This displacement then oscillates back
and forth, causing sound waves of a certain pitch. Since we measure
wavelength by the distance between points in the medium that take
us through a peak and a trough, this shape corresponds to half the
full wavelength, so the wavelength is λ = 2L. This will determine
the lowest note the violin can play (for a given string tension). The
next-lowest note will have λ = L, implying that there will be no
displacement at the center of the string (even though that point isn’t
clamped down). In general the only allowed wavelengths are λ =
2L/n, where n is a whole number (n = 1, 2, 3 …). That’s the point:
for con ned waves, nature produces whole numbers automatically.
De Broglie had hinted at this, but now Schrödinger realized that this
was the key to getting the quantum into quantum theory.
The mathematics of the old quantum theory had not done this in
a natural way. Bohr and his followers had taken mathematical
expressions that are continuous (i.e., don’t involve whole numbers
exclusively) and had simply restricted them to whole numbers by
at. Schrödinger, by contrast, was looking for an equation that
simply did not have continuous solutions, one in which each solution
would be connected to a whole number organically.

As noted above, wave equations, through the quantization of the
wavelength, have this property. They are di erential equations,
describing continuous change in space and time; but when the
waves are con ned, only certain wavelengths are physically
possible. So Schrödinger was looking for a matter-wave di erential
equation to describe electrons: it would have to describe a matter
eld and an extended “disturbance” of the eld that varied in space
and time but was con ned to the vicinity of the atomic nucleus by
the electron’s attraction to the nucleus.
Maxwell’s electromagnetic wave equation was the only
fundamental wave equation of physics at that time, but because
photons are massless, it had no safe place for the introduction of
Planck’s constant (as Einstein had learned to his dismay fteen years
earlier). Schrödinger’s challenge was to fashion a wave equation,
modeled on Maxwell’s, that included Planck’s constant as well as the
physical constants e and m, representing the charge and mass of the
electron. Maxwell’s wave equation does, however, contain the
wavelength, λ, of the EM waves which then lead to quantized values
and whole numbers, when it is written for “standing waves”
con ned to a speci c region. So the key idea was to write an
equation similar to the electromagnetic wave equation but for a new
wave eld, a “matter wave” described by a mathematical expression
now known as the “wavefunction,” and to replace λ using de
Broglie’s relation λ = h/p = h/mv.
With this approach Schrödinger had an equation containing h,
Planck’s constant, and m, the electron mass. The electron velocity, v,
can be eliminated from the equation in favor of the di erence
between its total energy and potential energy. The potential energy
of the electron orbiting the nucleus of course depends on its charge,
e. The resulting “time-independent Schrödinger equation” for
hydrogen contains the “holy trinity,” h, m, and e. And now the
moment of triumph: since only certain wavelengths are allowed,
that implies that the only unknown in the equation, the total energy
of the electron, can only take on certain allowed values. The energy
of electrons in an atom is quantized, not by at, but due to the

fundamental properties of waves con ned to a xed region in
space.12
After returning from his “ski” trip, Schrödinger immediately
subjected his new equation to the acid test: could it reproduce the
energy levels, grouped into di erent “shells,” for the case of atomic
hydrogen, which were known from spectral measurements for
decades and “explained” in an ad hoc manner by the old quantum
theory? The answer was a resounding yes. The details of the
calculations took only a few weeks, and on January 27, 1926, the
rst of Schrödinger’s seminal papers was received at the Annalen der
Physik. It states the breakthrough thus: “in this paper, I wish to
consider … the simple case of the hydrogen atom … and show that
the customary quantum conditions can be replaced by another
postulate, in which the notion of ‘whole numbers’ … is not
introduced…. The new conception is capable of generalization and
strikes, I believe, very deeply at the true nature of the quantum
rules.”
After presenting the detailed solution of his hydrogen equation,
he brie y touches on its interpretation and its origins. “It is, of
course, strongly suggested that we try to connect the [wavefunction]
with some vibration process in the atom, which would more nearly
approach reality than the electron orbits [of Bohr-Sommerfeld
theory],” but he feels that this is premature, since the theory needs
further development. However, “Above all, I wish to mention that I
was led to these deliberations by the suggestive papers of M. Louis
de Broglie … I have lately shown that the Einstein gas theory can be
based on [such] considerations … the above re ections on the atom
could have been represented as a generalization from those on the
gas model.” Later Schrödinger would say, “My theory was inspired
by L. de Broglie … and by brief, yet in nitely far-seeing remarks of
A. Einstein.”
This rst paper was followed in rapid succession by ve more in
just six months, in which Schrödinger, the consummate craftsman,
working alone, determined essentially all the known properties of
atomic spectra from the solutions of his wave equation. It was a

breathtaking display, about which even his competitor Born would
later remark, “what is more magni cent in theoretical physics than
Schrödinger’s six papers on wave mechanics?” The normally
reserved Sommerfeld called Schrödinger’s equation “the most
astonishing among all the astonishing discoveries of the twentieth
century.” Hence, by June of 1926, physicists had uncovered most of
the new laws and mathematical methods necessary to describe
physics on the atomic scale; they just didn’t yet know what they
meant. However, an interpretation was soon to emerge, one that
would challenge the philosophical principles that both Schrödinger
and Einstein held dear.
1

When Einstein held the theoretical physics position is was only at the level of an associate
professorship (extraordinarius); it was subsequently upgraded to a full professorship
(ordinarius).
2

Schrödinger’s interest in philosophy was so great that in 1918, before the war ended, he
had been planning to “devote himself to philosophy” more than physics, only to nd that
the chair he expected to receive, in Czernowitz, Ukraine, had disappeared along with
Austrian control of the region.
3

While Schrödinger was discreet in this nal public document, in 1933, to his diary, he
con ded that he never slept with a woman “who did not wish, in consequence, to live with
me for all her life.” There is some evidence to back this up.
4

An English theoretical physicist, Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac, was the last of the trio of
wunderkind to play a founding role in quantum mechanics, along with Pauli and
Heisenberg. Born in 1902, he was even younger than Heisenberg, and upon hearing
Heisenberg speak at Cambridge in July of 1925, he shortly afterward invented his own,
mathematically elegant version of the quantum equations. A few years later he discovered
the “Dirac Equation,” the quantum wave equation that takes into account the e ects of
relativity. However, he interacted little with Einstein during the period 1925–26 and so is
not very relevant to our historical narrative; Einstein remarked of him in August 1926, “I
have trouble with Dirac. This balancing on the dizzying path between genius and madness
is awful.”
5
6
7

First in class.
“That is the Schrödinger.”

It is likely that it is at this time he studied and understood Einstein’s 1917 reformulation
of the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory, which he later praised so highly.
8

This is always a great compliment from one physicist to the other, unless the former is
angling for priority.
9

For expert readers, this is the “division by N!” in the partition function (state counting),
which is approximately correct at high temperature and is still used in modern texts.

10

Einstein immediately saw this equivalence, writing to Schrödinger after his paper
appeared, “I see no basic di erence between your work on the theory of the ideal gas and
my own.”
11

Hermann Weyl, a distinguished physicist and a friend of Schrödinger’s, later famously
commented that Schrödinger “did his great work during a late erotic outburst in his life.”
12

This simple argument, while certainly part of Schrödinger’s reasoning, was not how he
rst presented the equation and omits his failed initial attempt to come up with an
equation consistent with Einstein’s relativity theory.

CHAPTER 28

CONFUSION AND THEN
UNCERTAINTY
If we are still going to have to put up with these damn quantum
jumps, I am sorry that I ever had anything to do with quantum
theory.
—SCHRÖDINGER TO BOHR, OCTOBER 1926
“I am convinced that you have made a decisive advance
with your formulation of the quantum condition, just as I am
equally convinced that the Heisenberg-Born route is o the track.”
Thus Einstein wrote to Schrödinger in late April of 1926. The
Heisenberg-Born route, a di erent approach to the “quantum
conditions,” introduced the term “quantum mechanics” as a more
rigorous replacement for the nebulous conceptual structure of
“quantum theory.” This method had begun to bear fruit six months
earlier than Schrödinger’s, and unlike his work it arose
independently of Einstein’s recent successes with the quantum gas.
It represented the radical point of view that since atoms were,
practically speaking, impossible to observe in space and time, one
should stop attempting to describe them by space-time orbits as in
classical mechanics. Instead one should develop a description in
terms of observable atomic variables, which might not themselves
be easily visualized, such as the absorption frequencies for light
incident on the atom, and how strongly each frequency was
absorbed. The rst breakthrough using this approach had come
from the twenty-three-year-old prodigy Werner Heisenberg, who
formulated his method in July of 1925. By the time of Schrödinger’s

work, Einstein had been ambivalently struggling with this new
framework for quite some time already, since Heisenberg was
working in the research group of his close friend Max Born in
Göttingen. Born had immediately informed him of Heisenberg’s
initial sighting of a New World of the atom, writing in a letter dated
July 15, 1925, that Heisenberg’s paper “appears rather mystifying,
but is certainly true and profound.”
Heisenberg was not the only young genius to nd his way to
Born’s research team in Göttingen. Six of Born’s research assistants
and one of his PhD students would go on to win the Nobel Prize,1
and three of them—Enrico Fermi, Wolfgang Pauli, and Heisenberg—
would contribute cornerstones to the rising quantum edi ce. Born,
only three years younger than Einstein, was from Prussian Silesia,
and was of Jewish descent (like many of Einstein’s closest friends).
He had been appointed associate professor at Berlin from 1915 to
1919, arriving just in time to observe Einstein’s awe-inspiring
success with general relativity theory. He, and his wife Hedwig,
formed a lifelong friendship with Einstein, although Born
maintained as well a certain reverence for his friend, whom he
would refer to, after his death, as “my beloved master.” Born made
seminal contributions to physics and eventually won the Nobel Prize
himself, but he was not an imposing intellect, and he sometimes had
trouble keeping up with his brilliant wards. Of Pauli, who was
renowned for his critical brilliance, he said, “I was from the
beginning quite crushed by him … he would never do what I told
him to do.” Heisenberg, he recalled, was quite di erent: “he looked
like a simple peasant boy, with short, fair hair, clear bright eyes and
a charming expression” when he arrived, “very quiet and friendly
and shy…. Very soon I discovered he was just as good in the brains
as the other one.”
After a few months spent visiting Niels Bohr in the fall of 1924,
Heisenberg returned to Göttingen with the germ of an idea for a
completely new quantum theory of the atom, distinct from the old
Bohr-Sommerfeld approach. This approach, while it worked for
hydrogen and a few other atoms, appeared to be breaking down for

more complicated atoms and molecules. In fact, by 1924 more than
a decade had passed since Bohr’s pathbreaking work, and a full
quarter century since that of Planck; many physicists were
beginning to wonder if the fundamental laws of the atom were
simply beyond human ken. In May of 1925 the enfant terrible,
Pauli, wrote despairingly to a friend, “right now physics is very
confused once again—at any rate it’s much too di cult for me and I
wish I were a movie comedian or some such.” However, Heisenberg
was just about to shake the eld out of its malaise.

FIGURE 28.1. Werner Heisenberg circa 1927. AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Segrè
Collection.

Heisenberg’s idea was to take the continuous trajectory of a
particle, which in classical physics is represented by the three
Cartesian coordinates x, y, z that vary continuously with time, and
replace each coordinate with a list of numbers arrayed in rows and
columns, rather like a Sudoku puzzle. Each number in the list is not
xed, but oscillates in time sinusoidally, with a characteristic

frequency. When applied to electrons in an atom, the frequencies
corresponded to the observable “transition frequencies” at which the
atom would absorb and emit light. First, however, Heisenberg
considered the most basic “toy problem” of mechanics, the familiar
linear harmonic oscillator (mass on a spring). He was able to show
that using his new de nition for position, and a similar one for
momentum, the energy of the oscillator was conserved; that is, it
didn’t change in time as long as the energy took the special values
found by Planck so long ago, quantized in steps of hυ (where υ is the
frequency of the oscillator). So here, in Heisenberg’s new arithmetic,
the whole numbers of quantum theory also arose naturally from the
math and were not imposed externally, just as they would later
appear naturally in Schrödinger’s wave approach. Heisenberg rst
discovered this while recovering from an allergy attack on the North
Sea island of Helgoland, and he was so excited that he stayed up all
night working, and then, lying on a rock watching the sun rise, he
thought to himself, “well something has happened.”
Indeed something had. This mode of thinking was simply
orthogonal to everything physicists had been trying to do in atomic
theory, and it broke the impasse. Heisenberg informed his friend
Pauli, who was elated, saying that the idea gave him renewed “joie
de vivre and hope … it’s possible to move forward again.”
Heisenberg wrote up his initial ideas with the boldly stated goal of
establishing a new quantum mechanics, “based exclusively on
relationships between quantities which are in principle observable.”
Born, with another talented student, Pascual Jordan, quickly
realized that Heisenberg’s “lists of numbers” were objects that
mathematicians refer to as matrices, and that the rule for combining
them that Heisenberg had invented was the known rule for
multiplying matrices. An odd thing about representing physical
magnitudes by matrices is that when multiplying matrices, in
general x times y is not equal to y times x. This curiosity would end
up having a deep signi cance in the nal theory. Within a few
months Born, Heisenberg, and Jordan were able to put together a
de nitive paper announcing the rules for calculating observable

quantities in the new quantum mechanics, which, in their version,
would become known also as “matrix mechanics.”
Einstein, despite Born’s endorsement, reacted suspiciously to the
breakthrough from the beginning, writing to Ehrenfest in September
1925 with a typically earthy judgment: “Heisenberg has laid a big
quantum egg. In Göttingen they believe in it (I don’t).” Despite his
skepticism, he realized that a substantial advance had been made,
telling Besso in December 1925 that matrix mechanics was “the
most interesting thing that theory had produced in recent times”;
but he could not resist a dig at its odd structure, “a veritable
witches’ multiplication table … exceedingly clever and because of
its great complexity safe against refutation.” Sarcasm
notwithstanding, he studied the theory closely and discovered
several technical objections, which he communicated to Jordan.2
Bose recalled that upon his arrival in Berlin in the fall of 1925,
“Heisenberg’s paper came out. Einstein was very excited about the
new quantum mechanics. He wanted me to try to see what the
statistics of light-quanta … would look like in the new theory.” But
Einstein’s reservations were beginning to win out; early in 1926 he
wrote to Ehrenfest, “more and more I tend to the opinion that the
idea, in spite of all the admiration [I have] for [matrix mechanics],
is probably wrong.” Just as he was hardening his negative view, in
January the newly reenergized Pauli showed how to derive the basic
hydrogen spectrum using matrix mechanics, an apparently decisive
proof that the theory was on the right track. Of course Schrödinger
was just at that time deriving the same result by the quite di erent
method of his wave equation.
Schrödinger’s approach was super cially much more congenial
to the classical physics worldview, based as it was on a continuum
wave equation in space and time, similar to that of Maxwell, and
seeming to arrive at quantized energies via the familiar properties of
vibrating waves. Einstein, Planck, Nernst, and Wien, the reigning
royalty of German physics, all jumped on the Schrödinger
bandwagon immediately. Born, now a bit under siege, later recalled
that Schrödinger’s paper “made much more of an impression than

ours. It was as though ours didn’t exist at all. All the people said
now we have the real quantum mechanics.” However, Born would
soon have a key ally; Niels Bohr had been moving toward a view
that the conventional space-time picture of the atom was fatally
awed, and his force of personality would eventually prevail,
although not without some further twists and turns.
Initially the two sides believed that they were faced with a
choice between two fundamentally di erent theories, so that
Einstein, in the same letter to Ehrenfest in which he called matrix
mechanics “probably wrong,” described Schrödinger’s innovation as
“not such an infernal machine [as matrix mechanics], but a clear
idea—and logical in its application.” And a few weeks later, in early
May, he told Besso, “Schrödinger has come out with two excellent
papers on the quantum rules, which present some profound truths.”
But the period of either/or decision making was brief. A dramatic
change in the debate occurred at one of the famed Berlin colloquia,
where Einstein often presided. A young student, Hartmut Kallmann,
recorded the events. “People were packed into the room as lectures
on Heisenberg’s and Schrödinger’s theories were given. At the end
of these reports Einstein stood up and said, ‘Now just listen! Up until
now we have had no exact quantum theory, and now suddenly we
have two. You will agree with me that these two exclude each other.
Which theory is correct? Perhaps neither is correct.’ At that moment
—I shall never forget it—Walter Gordon stood up and said: ‘I have
just returned from Zurich. Pauli had proved that the theories are
identical.’ ”3 Actually by mid-March Schrödinger, prior to Pauli
(who never even bothered to publish his proof), was able to show
that the equations of matrix mechanics followed from his wave
equation and vice versa; matrix mechanics could be used to derive
the Schrödinger equation. The two theories were indeed
mathematically equivalent.
At this point the debate shifted to the question of the meaning of
the new theory, and the aesthetic and conceptual merits of the two
di erent formulations. Already, in his paper proving their
equivalence, Schrödinger had slipped in a jibe against the matrix

approach, saying that he was “discouraged, if not repelled” by the
di culty of its methods and its lack of transparency. And he
repeatedly stated that his approach was the more “visualizable,”
prompting a fed-up Heisenberg to declare in a letter to Pauli, “what
[he] writes about Anschaulichkeit [visualizability] makes scarcely
any sense…. I think it is crap.”
Matters came to a head in July, when Schrödinger made a
“victory tour” of the conservative physics centers of Berlin, where
they had begun recruiting him to replace Planck, and Munich,
where Wien and Sommerfeld were in charge. By coincidence
Heisenberg was in Munich when Schrödinger spoke, and he raised
some unresolved issues for wave mechanics in the question period
at the end of the lecture. Before Schrödinger could respond,
Heisenberg was almost “thrown out of the room” by Wien, who
thundered, “young man, Professor Schrödinger will certainly take
care of all these questions in due time. You must understand that we
are now nished with all that nonsense about quantum jumps.” A
shaken Heisenberg wrote immediately to Bohr, who responded by
inviting Schrödinger to Copenhagen. A marathon session of
conceptual arm wrestling ensued, ending with Schrödinger in bed
exhausted and sick, but unconverted. The key point that Bohr
insisted upon is that while Schrödinger’s wave equation appeared to
restore a continuous description of nature, when applied to atoms it
would inevitably lead back to the fundamental discontinuity of
natural processes implied by quantum phenomena. At about the
same time Einstein and his close friend Max Born were wrestling
with exactly this issue.
For Einstein, the mathematical equivalence of the two theories
simply extended his doubts about matrix mechanics to wave
mechanics. He was not immune to the exhilaration felt by his
colleagues as the historic puzzles of atomic structure were being
unraveled almost on a weekly basis. After another colloquium, at
which the evidence for the newly discovered spin of the electron
was presented, Bose ran into him on a streetcar: “we suddenly found
him jumping [into] the same compartment where we were, and

forthwith he began talking excitedly about the things we have just
heard. He has to admit that it seems a tremendous thing,
considering the lot of things which these new theories correlate and
explain, but he is very much troubled by the unreasonableness of it
all. We were silent, but he talked almost all the time; unconscious of
the interest and wonder that he was exciting in the minds of the
other passengers.”
The unreasonableness that Einstein felt now focused mainly on
the meaning of Schrödinger’s wavefunction, which somehow
represented the behavior of electrons bound to atomic nuclei.
Schrödinger originally tried to argue that his matter waves could
accumulate in a localized region of atomic dimensions, carrying
along a bump or “crest” that behaved like a particle. But further
study soon showed that such a “wave packet” could not cohere over
long times; the math was actually very similar to that of light waves,
and the failure of this idea reprised Einstein’s own failure to nd
particulate behavior in Maxwell’s wave equation back in 1910. It is
likely that Einstein spotted this problem very quickly. A fallback
position, taken by Schrödinger subsequently, was to assert that there
simply are no electron particles; the “real electron” is a wave of
electric charge density, spread out in space on dimensions
somewhat larger than the atom. But there was a further basic
problem with this picture. Einstein expressed this in June of 1926 in
a letter to a colleague, Paul Epstein: “We are all here fascinated by
Schrödinger’s new theory of quantum levels … strange as it is to
introduce a eld in q-space, the usefulness of the idea is quite
astonishing.” What was this “q-space” that Einstein found so
strange?
All the waves that were known to physicists at that time were
represented as an oscillating eld or disturbance in our normal
three-dimensional space, even electromagnetic waves, which,
according to Einstein, didn’t require a medium (the ether) to exist.
The number of particles in a wave did not enter the equation except
through the density of the medium, as for sound waves, or through
the intensity of the wave, for electromagnetic waves. But electron

waves could not be represented that way. Isolated free electrons
could be studied, and their charge could be measured; it was –e, the
same in magnitude (and opposite in sign) from that of the proton.
The periodic table of elements requires that hydrogen have a single
electron, helium two electrons, lithium three, and so on. So to
describe electrons in helium, for example, one needed to have a
wave equation for two electrons in di erent quantum states, with
total electric charge adding up to 2 times –e. There was only one
way to do this, mathematically speaking, using Schrödinger’s
equation: the “two-electron” wavefunction had to “live” in a sixdimensional space, three dimensions for the rst electron and three
more for the second. Moreover, the wavefunction for electrons in a
large atom such as uranium-235 had to live in a 705-dimensional
space! This was “q-space,” an abstract space that “copies” our threedimensional space N times in order to represent N electrons.
Einstein recognized this strange feature in his very rst letter to
Schrödinger, and to him it was an enormous clue that a classical
wave picture might not be restored through Schrödinger’s equation.
Einstein was not the only person puzzling over how to interpret
Schrödinger’s waves. Max Born also had grave reservations about
the idea that the electron was a conventional wave. He worked
closely with the noted experimentalist James Franck, who did
measurements of electron beams colliding with atoms. “Every day,”
he recalled, “I saw Franck counting particles and not measuring
continuous wave distributions.” The moment he learned about the
Schrödinger equation, he had an intuition about what its matter
waves represented. He recalled Einstein’s idea that the
electromagnetic eld is a “ghost eld” guiding the photons. “I
discussed this with him very often. He said that as long as there was
nothing better, one can [use this approach].” But now, for matter
waves, Born felt this was the true picture: the Schrödinger
wavefunction represented a guiding wave of probability.
Mathematicians and physicists were already used to the idea of
assigning probabilities to a continuous space, essentially by dividing
the space into in nitesimal regions. Born argued that Schrödinger’s

wavefunction represented such a probability density,4 which
actually moved deterministically in space as a wave but simply
described how likely it would be to nd an electron particle in each
particular region of space.
By the end of June 1925 Born went public with his idea,
submitting a paper titled “Quantum Mechanics of Collision
Phenomena.” In it he formulates the problem of a directed matter
wave (representing a stream of electrons in a beam directed at an
atom) that interacts with the electric eld of the atom and then
“scatters” in all directions, just as water waves hitting a post send
out circular waves in all directions. Could this really mean that each
electron “breaks up” and goes in all directions like a smeared-out
electrical “oil slick”? That is exactly the view that Schrödinger
wants to take, but Born is having none of it. He insists that the
expanding circular wave just determines the probability of nding a
whole, pointlike electron emerging in particular direction. To test
this idea you need to do the same experiment over and over again
and count the number of electrons that go in each direction. “Here
the whole problem of determinism arises. From the point of view of
our quantum mechanics, there exists no quantity which in an
individual case causally determines the e ect of the collision…. I
myself tend to give up determinism in the atomic world.” In his
view we need to adopt a weaker form of determinism: “the motion
of particles follows probabilistic laws, but the probability itself
propagates according to the law of causality.”
When Schrödinger learned of Born’s interpretation, he was
incensed and engaged him in an “acrimonious debate.” As Born
recalled, “he believed that [matter waves] meant some continuous
distribution of matter and I was very much opposed to it [because of
Franck’s experiments]…. he was very o ensive, as he always was
when somebody objected to [his ideas].” Schrödinger’s opposition
notwithstanding, the Born probabilistic interpretation of the wave
function was widely adopted almost immediately, and was the basis
of Born’s eventual Nobel Prize. However, the person who had
inspired Born’s critical step, Einstein, was among the few holdouts.

In November of 1926 Born wrote to his dear friend: “I am entirely
satis ed, since my idea to look upon the Schrödinger wave eld as a
‘[ghost
eld]’ in your sense proves better all the time….
Schrödinger’s achievement reduces itself to something purely
mathematical; his physics is quite wretched.” But by this time
Einstein’s reservations had solidi ed into an unshakable conviction.
Just a few days later he sent Born his famous and crushing response:
“Quantum mechanics calls for a great deal of respect. But some
inner voice tells me that this is not the true Jacob. The theory o ers
a lot, but it hardly brings us closer to the Old Man’s secret. For my
part, at least, I am convinced he doesn’t throw dice.”
Some months earlier Einstein had met privately with Heisenberg
to discuss quantum mechanics. Heisenberg had presented his view
that the new theory should restrict itself to describing observable
quantities, and not unobservable electron orbits. Einstein rejected
this view, leading Heisenberg to rejoin, “isn’t that precisely what
you have done with relativity theory.” Einstein responded, “possibly
I did use this form of reasoning … but it is nonsense all the same.5
… It is the theory which decides what can be observed.” This
conversation stuck with Heisenberg, and a year later, while
pondering the meaning of quantum mechanics, it came back to him.
“It must have been one evening after midnight when I suddenly
remembered my conversation with Einstein, and particularly his
statement, ‘it is the theory which decides what we can observe.’ I
was immediately convinced that the key to the gate that had been
closed so long must be sought right here.” Within days he had used
the new quantum mechanics to prove his uncertainty principle. One
could observe the position of an electron very accurately, or the
momentum of an electron very accurately, but not both at the same
time. That’s what the theory had decided. Even this realization, so
ercely opposed by Einstein, had been stimulated by his own
insight.
1

In addition to Heisenberg, Pauli, and Fermi, the others were Max Delbruck (PhD), Eugene
Wigner, Gerhard Herzberg, and Maria Goeppert-Mayer, the second woman to win the prize
in physics.

2

Einstein wrote a number of letters to Heisenberg in this period, all of which have been
lost. At least one, Heisenberg recalled, was signed “in genuine admiration.”
3

Kallmann most likely erred in his memory of the city, since Gordon was working with
Pauli in Hamburg at that time. Schrödinger was in Zurich.
4

More precisely, it is the absolute square of the wavefunction that represents a probability
density.
5

Later, in replying to the same reproach from his friend Philipp Frank, Einstein responded
with the pithy retort, “A good joke should not be repeated too often.”

CHAPTER 29

NICHT DIESE TÖNE

All the fty years of conscious brooding have brought me no
closer to the answer to the question, “what are light quanta?” Of
course today every rascal thinks he knows the answer, but he is
deluding himself.
—EINSTEIN TO BESSO, 1951
“Here I sit in order to write, at the age of 67, something
like my own obituary … [this] does … not come easy—today’s
person of 67 is by no means the same as was the one of 50, of 30 or
of 20. Every reminiscence is colored by today’s being what it is, and
therefore by a deceptive point of view.” Einstein, in the
autobiographical sketch he thus begins, con rms his initial
disclaimer. Readers hoping to learn from the man himself amusing
anecdotes or details of his personal life were disappointed; the
article of forty-six pages is a rather dense treatment of his
philosophy of science, the evolution of physical theory, and then his
actual contributions to science, ending with a technical statement of
his latest attempt at a uni ed
eld theory. However, his
revolutionary work on light quanta, and his groundbreaking
quantum theory of speci c heat of 1905–1907, merit only one long
sentence. His early discovery of wave-particle duality gets a bit less
than one page, ending in a remark that the current quantum
theoretical explanation for it is “only a temporary way out.” His
foundational work on the quantum theory of radiation and the
spectacular discovery of Bose-Einstein condensation get no mention
at all. He devotes much more space to his critique of quantum

mechanics than to his contributions thereto. In contrast, relativity
theory, special and general, is laid out in beautiful and exacting
detail.
After the decisive year of 1926, in which he rejected the new
quantum theory as the ultimate description of reality, he brie y
sought to show, via his classic method of gedankenexperiments, that
the theory contained internal contradictions. However, fairly soon
he accepted the consistency of its logical structure with the
comment “I know this business is free of contradictions, but in my
view it contains a certain unreasonableness.” By September of 1931
he would graciously nominate both Heisenberg and Schrödinger for
the Nobel Prize, with the comment “I am convinced that this theory
undoubtedly contains a part of the ultimate truth.”
But despite this grudging endorsement, Einstein himself never
applied the quantum formalism to a speci c physics problem for the
rest of his career, except in the context of a famous critical paper
written in 1935 with younger collaborators, Podolsky and Rosen.
The article drew attention through a thought experiment to the
“spooky action at a distance” implied by quantum theory, which the
authors claimed made the theory an incomplete description of
reality. Modern realizations of this “EPR” experiment have fully
con rmed the existence of this e ect, a counter-intuitive correlation
between distant particles. Such e ects are referred to as
“entanglement”; they form the basis of much of the new eld of
quantum information science. Many now consider Einstein’s
recognition and prediction of the EPR e ect as his last major
contribution to physics.
Not only Einstein but also de Broglie and Schrödinger, the two
quantum pioneers whom he had championed, made little
contribution to the further application of quantum theory, and both
ended up joining Einstein in rejecting it on philosophical grounds.
As a consequence, the history of the discovery/invention of
quantum theory was told from the perspective of Bohr, Heisenberg,
Born, and their legions of students and collaborators. (Einstein, de
Broglie, and Schrödinger had no students or collaborators in their

works on quantum theory.) The matrix mechanicians, whose
approach was instantly devalued following Schrödinger’s discovery
of the “real quantum mechanics,” simply appropriated that work
and gave it the interpretation that t their understanding (and, it
must be admitted, the experimental evidence). Ironically,
Schrödinger was correct; his method was much more intuitive and
visualizable than that of Heisenberg and Born, and it has become
the overwhelmingly preferred method for presenting the subject.
But with Born’s probabilistic interpretation of the wave-function,
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, and Bohr’s mysterious
complementarity principle,1 the “Copenhagen interpretation”
reigned supreme, and the term “wave mechanics” disappeared; it
was all quantum mechanics. The limitations on human knowledge
of the physical world implied by these concepts were accepted by all
practicing physicists. To this new generation Einstein became
known primarily for relativity theory, admired by all, and
secondarily for his stubborn refusal to accept the elegant new
atomic theory of everything.
However, if one takes stock of the conceptual pillars of the new
theory, in light of the historical record, a rather di erent picture
emerges. Einstein surely shares with Planck the discovery of
quantization of energy, as Planck never accepted that the quantum
of action implied quantization of mechanical energy until many
years after Einstein had become the rst to proclaim it. It was
Einstein who rst realized that quantized energy levels explained
the speci c heat of solids, which justi ed the Third Law of
thermodynamics and brought chemists such as Nernst into the
quantum arena. Einstein, in his paper on light quanta, discovered
the rst force-carrying particles, photons, now the paradigm for all
the fundamental forces. Following up on this, he discovered the
wave-particle duality of light and, in 1909, based on his rigorously
correct uctuation argument, predicted that a “fusion theory” must
emerge to reconcile the two views. In 1916 his quantum theory of
radiation combined the ideas of Bohr, Planck, and his own light
quanta to put Planck’s blackbody law on a rm basis. Here he

introduced, for the rst time, the core concept of intrinsic
randomness in atomic processes, which the mature theory would
accept as fundamental. He also introduced the notion of the
probability to make a quantum jump, and he distinguished between
spontaneous and stimulated transitions, ideas fundamental to, for
example, the invention of the laser. And during 1924–1925 he
elevated Bose statistics from obscurity, explained what it meant and
why it had to be correct, and derived the mind-boggling
condensation phenomenon it implied, something undreamt of by
Bose himself. Finally, without ever publishing it, he developed the
rule of thumb that electromagnetic wave intensity could be thought
of as determining a probability to nd photons in a certain region of
space, the idea that stimulated Born’s crucial interpretation of
matter waves.
In summary: quantization of energy, force-carrying particles
(photons), wave-particle duality, intrinsic randomness in physical
processes, indistinguishability of quantum particles, wave elds as
probability densities—these are most of the key concepts of
quantum mechanics. As Born would later say, “Einstein is therefore
clearly involved in the foundation of wave mechanics and no alibi
can disprove it.” The magnitude of these achievements? Four Nobel
Prizes would be about right, instead of the one he received,
grudgingly, in 1922. Not that Einstein cared much for such
accolades.
Why did Einstein, who clearly understood the structure of the
new theory and the necessity of introducing radical concepts to
explain the atom, refuse to accept that theory and hold out for a
very di erent resolution of the quantum dilemma? In my opinion
this was the result of both his life experiences in doing science and
his fundamental motivation for choosing that life.
Twice in his scienti c career Einstein had wandered so far from
the mainstream that even the many colleagues who already
regarded him as an historic genius simply dismissed his views as
wildly speculative and not to be taken seriously. Special relativity
was not such a case, building as it did on the work of Lorentz and

others, although certainly it unveiled a spectacular physical and
epistemological insight that was uniquely Einsteinian. The rst time
was, of course, the light quantum “nonsense,” for which Planck felt
compelled to apologize when nominating him to the Prussian
Academy, and which Bohr still ridiculed a full two decades after it
was proposed. The second time was with the theory of general
relativity. In the latter case the idea did not elicit ridicule but simply
incomprehension. There was no crisis in gravitation theory that
required a radical resolution; what was this eccentric mastermind
doing anyway?
The development of general relativity had proceeded unevenly,
with dead ends and backtracking, technical errors ultimately
corrected, and then an epiphany as the beautiful nal equations
emerged and predicted correctly the precession of Mercury and the
bending of starlight. Einstein recalled the struggle thus: “the years of
searching in the dark for a truth that one feels but cannot express,
the intense desire and the alternation of con dence and misgiving
until one breaks through to clarity and understanding, are known
only to him who has experienced them himself.” Much later, in
rejecting the modern quantum theory, he remarked, “it is my
experiences with the theory of gravitation which determines my
expectations.”
Moreover, just before the promulgation of the new quantum
theory, in the summer of 1925, Einstein had experienced a similar
vindication of his faith in the existence of light quanta. In 1924 Bohr
and collaborators had put forth a new approach to the interaction of
light and matter that sacri ced the principle of conservation of
energy and momentum and introduced statistical considerations into
the theory, although not in a manner that would turn out to agree
with the nal quantum theory. In print Bohr atly stated that the
theory of light quanta was “obviously not [a] satisfactory solution of
the problem of light propagation.” Einstein staunchly opposed
Bohr’s new theory, since he believed that the conservation laws
must be exact or his beloved thermodynamics would be
undermined. He also pointed to dramatic recent experiments by the

American physicist Arthur Holly Compton that seemed to con rm
the conservation laws for the collisions of an x-ray photon with an
electron (treated as particles). However, it still could be argued that
Compton’s experiments left open the possibility that momentum and
energy were only conserved on average and not in each individual
collision. This possibility was ruled out late in 1924 by landmark
experiments of Bothe and Geiger in which the individual collisions
were measured and shown conclusively to obey the conservation
laws for two particles.
In January of 1925 Born wrote to Bohr, “the other day I was in
Berlin. There everybody is talking about the result of the BotheGeiger experiment, which decided in favor of light-quanta. Einstein
was exultant.” In April of 1925, two months before Heisenberg’s
coup de destin, Bohr conceded that it was time “to give our
revolutionary e orts [to banish light quanta] as honorable a funeral
as possible.” Einstein’s apparently infallible intuition had triumphed
one last time. Thus when the newest statistical theory of the atom,
the Heisenberg-Born-Schrödinger synthesis, commandeered the
stage, Einstein must have felt a sense of déjà vu. Just hold out long
enough, and again he would be proved right.
Einstein’s most famous objection to the theory was the “dice
complaint”: its insistence on the intrinsic randomness of individual
events and the abandonment of rigid causality. But Schrödinger’s qspace picture had actually undermined Einstein’s objection to a
probabilistic theory. Eugene Wigner, a leading gure in the second
generation of quantum pioneers, was studying in Berlin in the early
1920s, and recalled that Einstein was quite “fond” of his guiding
eld concept, “[which] has a great similarity with the present
picture of quantum mechanics,” but “he never published it …
[because] it is in con ict with the conservation principles.”
However, in the N-dimensional space of Schrödinger’s waves, the
conservation laws survived, even if the outcomes were
indeterminate. In quantum mechanics, if two particles collide, even
if one has full knowledge of the particle properties before the
collision, it is impossible to predict, in each individual case, in

which directions the two particles will be traveling after the
collision. One can only state the probability that they emerge from
the collision in a certain pair of directions. Nonetheless, there is zero
probability that the two particles emerge with a di erent total
momentum and energy than they went in with. They are like a
magic pair of coins, which when ipped individually give you heads
or tails randomly and with equal probability, but when ipped as a
pair always come up with opposite faces showing. So quantum
indeterminacy still respects the conservation laws.
Perhaps for this reason Einstein’s later critiques of quantum
theory focused less on its indeterminacy and more on its strange
epistemological status. In quantum mechanics the actual act of
measurement is part of the theory; those magic coins just mentioned
exist in a state of (heads, tails)-(tails, heads) uncertainty until they
are measured, and then they are forced to “decide” which state they
are in. This is true even if the coins are ipped very far apart,
implying that obtaining knowledge of one coin, through
measurement, “changes” the state of the other coin an arbitrary
distance away. This is the “spooky action at a distance” that Einstein
detested, now known as “quantum entanglement.” But beyond its
apparent tension with relativity theory, the entire conceptual
structure seems to break down the barrier between the “real world”
of objective nature and the subjective world of human perception.
“Do you really believe that the moon exists only if I look at it?” he
used to say. Such a notion fundamentally challenged Einstein’s
credo.
In his autobiography he states, “Physics is an attempt to
conceptually grasp reality as it is…, independently of its being
observed.” In a letter to Born, late in his life, he ampli ed on this
theme: “We have become Antipodean in our scienti c expectations.
You believe in the God who plays dice and I in complete law and
order in a world which objectively exists, and which I, in a wildly
speculative way, am trying to capture.” The importance of this
dichotomy, the transitory, subjective, and ultimately insigni cant
individual versus the eternal order of the Cosmos, was central to his

personal philosophy. As a very young man he rejected the
“nothingness of the hopes and strivings which chases most men
restlessly through life.” In this way one could “satisfy the stomach”
but not the “thinking and feeling being.” But he soon realized that
there was another way to live: “out yonder there was this huge
world, which stands independently of us human beings and which
stands before us like a great eternal riddle, at least partially
accessible to our thinking and inspection. The contemplation of this
world beckoned us like a liberation.” When he had risen to the apex
of success in this pursuit, he spoke these words in tribute to Max
Planck: “I believe … that one of the strongest motives that leads
men to art and science is the escape from everyday life with its
painful crudity and hopeless dreariness, from the fetters of one’s
own everyday desires … a nely tempered nature longs to escape
from personal life into the world of objective perception and
thought.”
In Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony, after three movements of
breathtaking beauty, the composer interrupts the nal movement
with the baritone’s thunderous introduction to the chorale section,
“Oh friends, not these notes” (nicht diese töne). As spectacular as his
previous creations had been, the composer was searching for
something di erent, something better. Similarly, Einstein could not
hear the musicality of his quantum creations, and would spend the
rest of his life in search of the nal movement that would bring his
atomic symphony to a harmonious resolution.
1

A philosophical principle about the impossibility of a uni ed picture of the atomic world,
the utility of which is controversial.

APPENDIX 1: THE PHYSICISTS
In order of appearance:
Max Planck (1858–1947): German theorist, expert on
thermodynamics, and Nobel laureate (1918) who introduced the
rst quantum ideas and his famous constant, h, in order to
explain the blackbody radiation law.
Wilhelm Wien (1864–1928): German Nobel laureate (1911) who did
the rst important theoretical work on the blackbody radiation
law, leading in 1896 to Wien’s law, which is now known to be
an approximation to the correct Planck law.
Heinrich Weber (1843–1912): German experimentalist and
researcher in thermodynamics. He was head of the Physics
Department at the Zurich Polytechnic when Einstein was a
student and clashed with him. His measurements of the
temperature variation of speci c heats in uenced Einstein’s
1907 quantum theory of speci c heat.
Marcel Grossmann (1878–1936): Swiss mathematician and
classmate of Einstein’s at the Zurich Poly. His family connections
played the key role in Einstein’s receiving the patent o ce job in
Bern. Later, in 1913, he became a professor at ETH and
collaborated with Einstein on a fundamental paper in General
Relativity Theory.
Mileva Maric (1875–1948): Promising physics student who became
Einstein’s rst wife and, after failing to obtain her diploma, did
not pursue a career in physics.
Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1726): Founder of classical mechanics
through Newton’s three laws and the invention of calculus. If
you are reading this book you know who he is.

Michael Faraday (1791–1867): English scientist whose experiments
led to the concept of electric and magnetic elds; he was greatly
admired by Einstein.
James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879): Scottish theoretical physicist
who
rst found the complete equations of classical
electromagnetism, which are named for him. He was also a
pioneer of statistical mechanics.
Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906): Austrian theoretical physicist who,
along with Maxwell and Gibbs, founded the discipline of
statistical mechanics. He discovered the fundamental
microscopic law of entropy, S = k log W, where k is a
fundamental constant of nature known as Boltzmann’s constant.
Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839–1903): American physicist and
mathematician who, along with Boltzmann and Maxwell,
founded statistical mechanics.
Hendrick Antoon Lorentz (1853–1928): Dutch theorist and Nobel
laureate (1902) who initially doubted the validity of the Planck
law. He became a close friend of, and father gure to Einstein,
who regarded him as the greatest thinker he had ever met.
Lord Rayleigh (1842–1919): English mathematical physicist and
Nobel laureate (1904); he was an expert on wave theory,
particularly acoustics. He proposed the Rayleigh-Jeans law based
on classical statistical mechanics, which leads to the incorrect
prediction of the ultraviolet catastrophe.
James Jeans (1877–1946): English theoretical physicist and
astronomer who contributed to, and also championed, the
Rayleigh-Jeans law.
Svante Arrhenius (1859–1927): Swedish physicist and physical
chemist, Nobel laureate (1903) for his work on electrolysis, who
in uenced the establishment and awarding of the Nobel Prizes in
Physics and in Chemistry.
Arnold Sommerfeld (1868–1951): German theoretical physicist and
leader in the development of the Bohr-Sommerfeld approach to
the quantum theory of atoms.

Johannes Stark (1874–1957): German experimental physicist and
Nobel laureate (1919), expert on the photoelectric e ect, who
led the anti-Semitic physics movement under the Nazis.
Walther Nernst (1864–1941): German physical chemist, inventor,
and Nobel laureate (1920); he proposed the Third Law of
thermodynamics and recruited Einstein to Berlin.
Niels Bohr (1885–1962): Danish physicist and Nobel laureate
(1922), who proposed the rst successful quantum theory of the
atom and played a leading role in interpreting the nal form of
quantum mechanics.
Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937): New Zealand–born British physicist,
Nobel laureate in chemistry (1908). His experiments revealed
the nuclear structure of the atom.
Paul Ehrenfest (1880–1933): Austrian Jewish physicist who became
professor in Leiden and a signi cant contributor to quantum
theory. He was one of Einstein’s closest friends.
Arthur Eddington (1882–1944): English astrophysicist who led the
eclipse expedition that con rmed Einstein’s theory of general
relativity.
Satyendra Nath Bose (1894–1974): Indian theoretical physicist who
rst proposed the correct statistical method of treating quantum
particles as indistinguishable in his paper on photons, sent to
Einstein in 1924.
Erwin Schrödinger (1887–1961): Austrian theoretical physicist and
Nobel laureate (1933). He invented the wave equation approach
to quantum mechanics, which is the main approach used in
modern physics.
Duke Louis de Broglie (1892–1987): French theoretical physicist and
Nobel laureate (1929). He proposed the idea of matter waves,
the complement to Einstein’s notion of quanta of light, and
in uenced Einstein’s work on the quantum gas of atoms.
Max Born (1882–1970): German Jewish theoretical physicist and
Nobel laureate (1954). He played a major role in formalizing the
Heisenberg approach to quantum mechanics, known as matrix

mechanics, as well as in providing the probabilistic
interpretation of Schrödinger waves. He was one of Einstein’s
closest friends.
Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976): German theoretical physicist and
Nobel laureate (1932). He invented the rst correct formulation
of modern quantum mechanics, matrix mechanics, in 1925. Two
years later he proposed his uncertainty principle.
Wolfgang Pauli (1900–1958): Austrian theoretical physicist and
Nobel laureate (1945). A brilliant but caustic personality, he
discovered that electrons do not obey Bose statistics, because
only one electron can occupy a given quantum state, the Pauli
exclusion principle.

APPENDIX 2: THE THREE THERMAL
RADIATION LAWS
OVERVIEW
All objects emit electromagnetic radiation because they contain
some amount of thermal energy that excites some of their atoms and
molecules, at any one time, to higher energy states. These excited
atoms and molecules then emit radiation (photons) and fall back
down to their lowest (ground) state, while others are continually
being excited, which maintains energy balance (thermal
equilibrium). The amount of thermal energy an object has increases
with its temperature, and so it emits more energetic, higherfrequency radiation as its temperature increases. But thermal
radiation, unlike radio waves or laser light, for example, is not
emitted at a single frequency; it is emitted over a broad band of
frequencies, with the most radiation coming out at a speci c
frequency (the “peak” of the radiation curve), which depends on the
temperature.
The key question challenging physicists circa 1900 was how
much energy in the form of radiation is emitted in each band of
frequencies for a perfect emitter at a given temperature. Because of
a principle of thermodynamics known as Kircho ’s law, a perfect
emitter must also be a perfect absorber of radiation (i.e., a perfectly
black object), called a blackbody, and the radiation it emits is called
blackbody radiation. That doesn’t necessarily mean it will appear
black to the eye; if it is heated to a su ciently high temperature, it
will glow at optical frequencies, which are visible to the eye. Thus
the holy grail for the physics of heat at the time was the
determination of the universal mathematical formula describing the
energy of heat radiation (per unit volume) in a given frequency

band for a given temperature; we will call this formula “the thermal
radiation law.” There were three radiations laws of historical
importance.
1. The Planck law: This law was proposed and then derived by
Max Planck in the fall of 1900, when it became clear that
the Wien law failed. In order to justify this new law, Planck
had to introduce the concept of quantization of energy
(although he did not put it that way), which set the
quantum revolution in motion. It required the introduction
of Planck’s constant, h, which appears in the radiation law
and in the fundamental relation ε = hυ, relating the allowed
increments of the energy, E, of a vibrating molecule to its
frequency of vibration, υ. His law t the experimental data
very well and still does to this day. It is the correct radiation
law according to modern physics.
2. The Wien law: This law was proposed by Wilhelm Wien in
the early 1890s and was believed by many, including
Planck, to be correct until 1900. It turns out to be an
approximation to the correct Planck law that works well
when one looks at frequencies that are higher than the peak
frequency of the Planck law for a given temperature. For the
achievable temperatures for blackbody experiments at the
time of these rst measurements, the higher frequencies
were at or near the visible portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum, and hence more easily measured, than those
below the peak frequency, which were at infrared
wavelengths.
3. The Rayleigh-Jeans law: A version of this law was proposed
provisionally by Lord Rayleigh in 1900, and it turns out to
be an approximation to the correct Planck law at low
frequencies, that is, well below the peak frequency predicted
by the Planck law. It was then proposed in its correct form
by Rayleigh, with input from James Jean, in 1905; at
roughly the same time it was derived but then rejected by

Albert Einstein. Einstein rejected because it led to the
“ultraviolet catastrophe.” This ominous descriptor was
invented by the physicist Paul Ehrenfest because the
Rayleigh-Jeans law predicts that the total energy in thermal
radiation should be in nite. Einstein believed this property
ruled out the law, whereas Jeans argued for a loophole that
kept the theory in play until roughly 1911, when the Planck
law became universally accepted.
MATHEMATICAL STATEMENT OF THE RADIATION LAWS
This section assumes that one knows the properties of the
exponential function, ex. Here the letter e stands for the irrational
number that is the base of the natural logarithm. The object to be
calculated to describe thermal radiation is the so-called spectral
energy density of radiation, ρ(υ,T), which describes the energy of
radiation emitted by a blackbody in a small interval centered at
frequency υ for an object at absolute temperature T. According to
Planck the correct form of this function is

where h is Planck’s constant, k is Boltzmann’s constant, and c is the
speed of light. Note that the factor in parentheses in the numerator
is the one that Bose mentioned in his letter to Einstein in 1924,
which contained his new derivation of the radiation law.
The exponential function gets very large compared to 1 when its
argument, in this case the ratio hυ/kT, is larger than 1 (i.e., when hυ
> kT). When this is the case, one can neglect the term –1 in the
denominator of the Planck law, and one nds the approximate form
of the radiation law
(2) ρ(υ,T) ≈ (8πhυ3/c3) e−hυ/kT (Wien law).

This is the form of the radiation law proposed by Wilhem Wien,
which we now know is a good approximation for frequencies υ >>
kT/h. This de nes what is meant by “high frequency”; it is a relative
term, and it depends on the temperature of the blackbody. Visible
light is considered high frequency at the temperature of the earth’s
surface but not at the temperature of the sun’s surface.
In the other limit, of low frequencies, when the υ << kT/h, the
exponential function becomes close to the value 1. In fact ex ≈ 1 +
x (here x stands for hυ/kT), and if we put this into equation (1) for
the Planck law, a factor of hυ cancels in between the numerator and
denominator, and with it all trace of the quantization of energy
inherent in the Planck law vanishes. The resulting formula is
(3) ρ(υ,T) ≈ (8πυ2/c3) kT (Rayleigh-Jeans law).
Note that this approximation to the thermal radiation law shows
that for a given frequency, the amount of energy is proportional to
the temperature. This is the experimental clue that led Planck to the
correct radiation law. However, for a given temperature the energy
density is also proportional to the square of the frequency. If this
were the correct radiation law for all frequencies, one would reach
the absurd conclusion that the energy density for high frequencies
tends to in nity. This is the ultraviolet catastrophe that Einstein
objected to in 1905.
The graph in gure A2.1 compares the three radiation laws.

FIGURE A2.1. Graph of the three proposed Radiation Laws, with energy density on the
vertical axis and frequency on the horizontal axis, for a blackbody at room temperature.
The lightest gray curve, which simply increases to in nity, is the Rayleigh-Jeans Law; note
that it agrees with the Planck Law (black curve) for very low frequencies. The black curve
is the Planck Law with a peak and then a decay, but with a more rapid rise at low
frequencies than the Wien Law (gray). The Wien Law disagrees substantially with the
Planck Law below the peak, but agrees very well with it above the peak. Inset is a blow up
of the little dashed box in the graph at low frequencies, to show the excellent agreement
between the Planck and Rayleigh-Jeans Law, and large disagreement with Wien’s Law that
was rst found experimentally circa 1900. Courtsey of Alex Cerjan.

NOTES
BOOK EPIGRAPH
Page
vi

Science as something already in existence: John Stachel, “Einstein and the Quantum,” in
Einstein from B to Z, vol. 9 (Boston: Birkhauser, 2002), 373.

INTRODUCTION. A HUNDRED TIMES MORE THAN RELATIVITY
THEORY
Page
3

I have thought a hundred times: Abraham Pais, Subtle Is the Lord (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005), 9.

CHAPTER 1. “AN ACT OF DESPERATION”
Page
7

It would be edifying if: Albert Einstein, “Max Planck as a Scientist,” in The Collected
Papers of Albert Einstein, trans. Anna Beck (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1987–2009), vol. 4, doc. 23, p. 273. All citations are to the English editions of the
papers and will be abbreviated CPAE.

8

my decision to devote myself: Max Planck, Scienti c Biography and Other Papers, trans.
Frank Gaynor (New York: Philosophical Library, 1949), 13.

10

the limits of validity: Thomas Kuhn, Black-Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity,
1894–1912 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), 89.

10

the only physical theory : P. A. Schilpp, ed., Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (La
Salle: Open Court, 1970), 33.

10

he is the model of the theorist: Planck to Wien, 27 February 1909, in J. L. Heilbron,
Dilemmas of an Upright Man: Max Planck as Spokesman for German Science (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1986), 8.

11

The interesting results of long wavelength: Max Planck, “On an Improvement of Wien’s
Equation for the Spectrum” [original article no. 1 in References], reprinted in Haar,
The Old Quantum Theory, 79.

11

by nature … peacefully inclined: Planck to Robert William Woods, 7 October 1931, in
Armin Hermann, The Genesis of Quantum Theory (1899–1913) (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1971), 23.

12

I should therefore be permitted: Planck, “On an Improvement,” 81.

12

even if the absolutely precise: Planck, Scienti c Autobiography and Other Papers (New
York: Philosophical Library, 1949), 41.

12

some weeks of the most strenuous: Max Planck, Nobel Lecture, p. 4,
http://nobelprize.org/physics/laureates/1918/planck-lecture.html, accessed May 14,
2006.

12

We consider, however: Max Planck, “On the Theory of the Energy Distribution Law of
the Normal Spectrum” [original article no. 2 in References], reprinted in translation
in Haar, The Old Quantum Theory, 84.

13

spooky action at a distance: Einstein to Schrödinger, 19 June 1935, in Walter Isaacson,
Einstein: His Life and Universe (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001), 454.

13

an act of desperation: Hermann, Genesis of Quantum Theory, 23.

13

I considered the [quantum hypothesis]: Planck to Woods, ibid., 24.

CHAPTER 2. THE IMPUDENT SWABIAN
Page
15

neurasthenic exhaustion: Albrecht Folsing, Albert Einstein: A Biography, trans. and
abrid. Ewald Osers (New York: Penguin Press, 1998), 30.

15

assured them most resolutely: Ibid., 32.

15

prodigy: Ibid., 36.

16

Weber lectured on heat: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 16 February 1898, CPAE, vol. 1,
doc. 39, p. 123.

17

[Weber’s] lectures were outstanding: Carl Seelig, Albert Einstein: A Documentary
Biography, trans. Mervyn Savill (London: Staples Press, 1956), 29.

17

Einstein’s hopes of learning: Ibid.

17

This is the rst lecture on mathematical: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 58.

17

[Einstein] would never get anywhere: Ibid., 27.

17

It is pretty much the same: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 19.

18

A cold wind of skepticism: Ibid., 14.

18

holy zeal: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 61.

18

Herr Weber … Herr Professor: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 30.

18

there is no lack of eagerness: Ibid., 40.

19

You’re a very clever boy: Ibid., 30.

19

regulation paper: Ibid.

20

tremendous surprise: Ibid., 28.

CHAPTER 3. THE GYPSY LIFE
Page
21

Was a model student: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 34.

21

vagabond existence: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 52–53.

21

his impulsive and upright nature: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 38.

22

you must go all the way: Ibid., 39.

22

What the one teaches is not right: Ibid., 40.

22

I never saw a trace: Ibid., 43.

23

Einstein is 5 ft 9: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 58.

23

He had the kind of male beauty: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 44.

24

It’s now been quite a while: Einstein to Maja Einstein, 1898, CPAE, vol. 1, doc. 38, p.
123.

24

I am a cheerful fellow: Einstein to Alfred Stern, 3 May, 1901, CPAE, vol. 1, doc. 104,
p. 168.

24

My broodings about radiation: Einstein to Mileva Maric, after 28 November 1989,
CPAE, vol. 1, doc. 43, p. 126.

25

If only you would be again: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 10 August 1899, CPAE, vol. 1,
doc. 52, p. 131.

25

Mama and Papa are very phlegmatic: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 9 August 1900, CPAE,
vol. 1, doc. 71, p. 144.

25

You too don’t like the philistine: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 3 October 1900, CPAE, vol.
1, doc. 79, p. 152.

25

One must shun: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 9 August 1900, CPAE, vol. 1, doc. 71, p.
144.

25

Neither of us have gotten a job: Einstein to Helene Kau er, 11 October 1900, CPAE,
vol. 1, doc. 81, p. 153.

CHAPTER 4. TWO PILLARS OF WISDOM
Page
26

The man loved mysterious Nature: Harry Woolf, ed., quoted by Freeman Dyson, Some
Strangeness in Proportion: Einstein Centennial (Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1980), 376.

26

About Max Planck’s studies: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 4 April 1901, CPAE, vol. 1, doc.
96, p. 162.

26

soon I will have honored: Ibid., 163.

27

Maybe his newest theory: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 10 April 1901, CPAE, vol. 1, doc.
97, p. 163.

27

To nd facts which would attest: Albert Einstein, “Autobiographical Notes,” in Schilpp,
ed., Albert Einstein, 46.

29

In the beginning—if such a thing: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 32.

29

We may regard the present: David Lindley, Uncertainty: Einstein, Bohr, and the Struggle
for the Soul of Science (New York: Doubleday, 2007), 22.

31

what’s the go o’ that: Ivan Tolstoy, James Clerk Maxwell (Edinburgh: Canongate,
1981), 14.

31

He was the one acknowledged genius: Ibid., 55.

31

Happy is the man: Ibid., 63.

32

I was sent for to London: Ibid., 153.

33

was it God that wrote: Ibid., 126.

34

From the long view: Richard Feynman, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, vol. 2
(Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1964), 1–6.

34

I have also a paper a oat: Tolstoy, Maxwell, 126.

34

I have been thinking: Ibid., 169.

34

[the purely mechanical world …]: Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, 319.

35

Imagine his feelings when: Ibid.

35

to few men in the world: Tolstoy, Maxwell, 2.

35

No one has ever seen: J. C. Maxwell, The Scienti c Papers of James Clerk Maxwell, ed.
W. D. Niven, vol. 2 (Dover, NY: Dover Publications, 1965), 376–377; Address to
Royal Society, April 1873, Nature, September 1873; James Clerk Maxwell,
“Molecules,”
Victorian
Web,
http://www.victorianweb.org/science/maxwell/molecules.html, accessed July 20,
2008.

CHAPTER 5. THE PERFECT INSTRUMENTS OF THE CREATOR
Page
36

The Boltzmann is magni cent: Einstein to Maric, September 1900, CPAE, vol. 1, doc.
75, p. 149.

36

By the study of Boltzmann: Maxwell to P. G. Tait, August 1873, in Pais, Subtle Is the
Lord, 66.

36

Boltzmann … is not easy: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 104.

37

An atom is a body: Maxwell, Scienti c Papers, 376–377; Address to Royal Society,
April 1873; Maxwell, “Molecules,” 1.

37

Our business this evening: Ibid., 2.

38

The most important consequence: Ibid., 3.

39

If all these molecules were ying: Ibid., 4.

39

Lucretius … tells us: Ibid., 7.

40

The modern atomists have: Ibid.

40

The equations of dynamics: Ibid., 8.

42

Natural causes, as we know: Ibid., 9.

CHAPTER 6. MORE HEAT THAN LIGHT
Page
44

I have again made the acquaintance: Einstein to Jost Winteler, 8 July 1901, in Folsing,
Albert Einstein, 86.

44

the Valiant Swabian is not afraid: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 15 April 1901, CPAE, vol.
1, doc. 101, p. 166.

45

As for science, I have a few: Einstein to Marcel Grossman, 14 April 1901, CPAE, vol. 1,
doc. 100, p. 165.

46

my worthless rst two papers: Einstein to Johannes Stark, 7 December 1907, CPAE,
vol. 2, doc. 66, p. 46.

46

A letter from Marcelius: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 12 December 1901, CPAE, vol. 1,
doc. 127, p. 186.

47

out of consideration for: Isaacson, Einstein, 72.

47

The situation with the private lessons: Einstein to Mileva Maric, November 1901, CPAE,
vol. 1, doc. 136, p. 181.

47

It is true … that it is very nice: Einstein to Mileva Maric, 17 February 1902, CPAE, vol.
1, doc. 137, p. 193.

47

testifying to great poverty: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 97.

47

annoying business of starving: Einstein to Mileva Maric, May 1901, CPAE, vol. 1, doc.
110, p. 173.

48

leads a very pleasant: Einstein to Michele Besso, 22 January 1903, CPAE, vol. 2, doc.
5, p. 7.

49

the resemblance is downright: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 110.

49

not have published those papers: Ibid., 109.

50

[Hendrik] Lorentz, I never met: Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, 73.

CHAPTER 7. DIFFICULT COUNTING
Page
55

The Second Law of Thermodynamics has: Maxwell to Rayleigh, in James Gerald
Crowther, Scienti c Types (New York: Dufour, 1970), 67.

55

lively beings incapable of doing work: Tolstoy, Maxwell, 136.

55

to show that the Second Law: Ibid., 137.

56

I derive an expression for the entropy: Albert Einstein, “On the General Molecular
Theory of Heat” [original article no. 5 in References], reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc.
5, p. 68.

59

an act of desperation: Hermann, Genesis of Quantum Theory, 23.

59

We consider, however: Planck, “On the Theory of the Energy Distribution Law,” 84.

61

Dividing E by ε: Ibid.

CHAPTER 8. THOSE FABULOUS MOLECULES
Page
63

those happy Bernese years: Ann. M. Hentschel and Gerd Grassho , Albert Einstein:
Those Happy Bernese Years (Bern: Staemp i, 2005), title page.

63

struck by the extraordinary brilliance: Isaacson, Einstein, 80.

63

laughed so much: Roger High eld and Paul Carter, The Private Lives of Albert Einstein
(London: Faber & Faber, 1993), 102.

65

To the immortal Olympia Academy: Einstein to Solovine and Habicht, 3 April 1953, in
Banesh Ho mann with the collaboration of Helen Dukas, Albert Einstein: Creator and
Rebel (New York: Viking Press, 1972), 244.

66

completely useless … an awful schlemiel … [Besso] has: Isaacson, Albert Einstein, 62.

66

could not have found a better: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 71.

66

Dear Habicht, such a solemn air: Einstein to Habicht, 18 or 25 May 1905, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 27, p. 20.

CHAPTER 9. TRIPPING THE LIGHT HEURISTIC
Page
70

The wave [Maxwell] theory: Albert Einstein, “On a Heuristic Point of View concerning
the Production and Transformation of Light” [original article no. 6 in References],
reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 14, p. 86.

70

the most revolutionary sentence: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 143.

72

within a few hours (quoted in footnote): Ibid., 71.

73

On my side, I have been: Besso to Einstein, 17 January 1928, Einstein Besso
Correspondance, 1903–1955, trans. Pierre Speziali (Paris: Hermann, 1972), 225.

73

Planck’s formula for ρ(ν): Einstein, “On a Heuristic Point of View,” 90.

76

Morbid dread of mistakes (quoted in footnote): Crowther, Scienti c Types, 58.

77

it makes no di erence: Ibid., 98.

79

As far as I can see: Einstein, “On a Heuristic Point of View,” 101.

CHAPTER 10. ENTERTAINING THE CONTRADICTION
Page
80

I do not seek the meaning: Planck to Einstein, 6 July 1907, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 47, p.
31.

80

It is a real pity: Lorentz to Einstein, 6 May 1909, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 153, p. 107.

83

Take electricity out: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 159.

84

But such a thing does not seem to exist: Ibid., 165.

84

The introduction of a ‘light ether’: Einstein, “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies”
[original article no. 7 in References], reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 23, p. 141.

85

one can obtain a satisfactory theory: Einstein, “On the Development of Our Views
concerning the Nature and Constitution of Radiation” [original article no. 11 in
References], reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 60, p. 383.

CHAPTER 11. STALKING THE PLANCK
Page
86

The three of us are ne: Einstein to Solovine, 27 April 1906, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 36, p.
25.

86

a respectable federal ink pisser: Einstein to Alfred Schnauder, 5 January–11 May 1907,
CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 43, p. 28.

88

It is largely due to: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 201.

89

simply a systematic … There has been a false: Ibid., 211.

89

but more urgent than: Planck to Einstein, 6 July 1907, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 47, p. 31.

90

su cient to account for all: Einstein, “On a Heuristic Point of View,” 90.

90

In a study published last year: Albert Einstein, “On the Theory of Light Production and
Light Absorption” [original article no. 8 in References], reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2,
doc. 34, p. 192.

92

Hence we must view the following proposition: Ibid., 195.

92

For if the energy of a resonator … In my opinion: Ibid., 196.

CHAPTER 12. CALAMITY JEANS
Page
95

the domain of natural sciences: J. J. O’Connor and E. F. Roberston, “Presidential
Address to the British Association in Montreal in 1884,” last modi ed February
2005,
accessed
20
February
2009,
http://www-history.mcs.standrews.ac.uk./Biographies/Rayleigh.html.

95

little more than a conjecture: Lord Rayleigh, “Remarks upon the Law of Complete
Radiation” [original article no. 3 in References], reprinted in Scienti c Papers by Lord
Rayleigh, vol. 6, doc. 260, p. 483.

97

what would appear to be wanted: Lord Rayleigh, “The Law of Partition of Kinetic
Energy” [original article no. 5 in References], reprinted in Scienti c Papers by Lord
Rayleigh, vol. 6, doc. 253, p. 451.

98

the question is one to be settled: Rayleigh, “Remarks upon the Law,” 484.

98

although for some reason: Ibid.

99

If an interaction between aether and matter: Hermann, Genesis of Quantum Theory, 33.

100 We can now trace the course: Ibid.
102 he is the model of the theorist: Planck to Wien, 27 February 1909, in Heilbron,
Dilemmas of an Upright Man, 8.

CHAPTER 13. FROZEN VIBRATIONS
Page
103 The whole thing started: “Peter J. W. Debye: An Interview,” Science, vol. 145, p. 554
(1964).
103 one is allowed to infer: Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, 390.
104 di culty and expense: Ibid.
106 through the diamond experiment: Diana Kormos Barkan, Walther Nernst and the
Transition to Modern Physical Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999),
163.
106 sunk back into the sea: Einstein to Mileva Maric, April 4 1901, CPAE, vol. 1, doc. 96,
p. 162.
107 For although one has thought before: Albert Einstein, “Planck’s Theory of Radiation and
the Theory of Speci c Heat,” Annalen der Physik, vol. 22, pp. 180–190 (1907),
reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 38, p. 218.
107 I believe we must not content ourselves: Ibid., 218–219.
110 most certainly there could exist: A. Einstein, “Correction to my Paper, ‘Planck’s Theory
of Heat Radiation, etc.,’ ” CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 42, p. 233.

CHAPTER 14. PLANCK’S NOBEL NIGHTMARE
Page
111 The two constants: Hermann, Genesis of Quantum Theory, 11.
112 sacri ce him: Patrick Co ey, Cathedrals of Science (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2008), 3.
113 [Arrhenius] is somewhat corpulent: Ibid., 17.
113 pronounced hostility toward atomism: Elisabeth Crawford, “Arrhenius, the Atomic
Hypothesis, and the 1908 Nobel Prizes in Physics and Chemistry,” Isis, vol. 75, p.
510 (1984).
114 he had seen many transmutations (quoted in footnote): Pierre Marage and Gregoire
Wallenborn, eds., The Solvay Councils and the Birth of Modern Physics, Science
Networks, vol. 22 (Basel: Birkauser Verlag, 1999), 118.
115 To conclude, I may point to: Planck, “On the Theory of the Energy Distribution Law,”
82–90.
115 If the theory is at all correct: Ibid.
116 concern for a physics: Heilbron, Dilemmas of an Upright Man, 54.
116 I could derive some satisfaction: Hermann, Genesis of Quantum Theory, 21.
117 made it extremely plausible: Ibid., 362.
117 it is very far from being: Bengt Nagel, “The Discussion concerning the Nobel Prize for
Max Planck,” in Science, Technology and Society in the Time of Alfred Nobel: Nobel
Symposium 52, ed. C. G. Bernhard, E. Crawford, and P. Sorbom (New York: Pergamon
Press, 1982), 361.
118 [if true] I presume: Crawford, “Arrhenius, the Atomic Hypothesis, and the 1908 Nobel
Prizes,” 519.
118 Einstein simply postulates: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 215.
118 Everything which emanated: H. A. Lorentz, Impressions of His Life and Work, ed. G. L.
de Haas-Lorentz (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1957), 8.
119 Whatever was accepted by Lorentz: Hermann, Genesis of Quantum Theory, 45.
119 wrestled continuously: Lorentz to Wien, 6 June 1908, ibid., 34.
119 The theory of Planck is the only one: Ibid., 37.
120 If we examine the Jeans-Lorentz formula: Ibid., 40.
120 I was extremely disappointed: Wien to Sommerfeld, 18 May 1908, ibid., 39–40.
120 thus we should really dismiss: Lorentz to Wien, 6 June 1908, ibid., 41.
121 a completely new hypothesis: Nagel, “The Discussion concerning the Nobel Prize for
Max Planck, 363.
121 It is I, along with Phragmen: Ibid.

CHAPTER 15. JOINING THE UNION
Page
122 So, now I too am an o cial: Einstein to Jakob Laub, 19 May 1909, CPAE, vol. 5, doc.
161, p. 120.
122 I must tell you quite frankly: Laub to Einstein, 1 May 1908, CPAE vol. 5, doc. 91, p.
63.
123 a few old fogies: Einstein to Besso, 6 March 1952, ibid.
123 pigsty: Einstein to Besso, 7 March 1903, in Folsing, Albert Einstein, 228.
123 I can’t understand a word: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 88.
124 [Einstein] will most likely: F. Adler to V. Adler, 19 June 1908, in Folsing, Albert
Einstein, 247.
124 I was really lucky: Einstein to Laub, CPAE, 19 May, vol. 5, doc. 161, p. 120. I have
used the Folsing translation.
125 impression of a colonel: “Sommerfeld, Arnold (Johannes Wilhelm),” Complete
Dictionary
of
Scienti c
Biography
(2008),
Encyclopedia.com,
http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G2-2830904080.html, accessed February 4,
2013.
126 we are now all longing: Arnold Sommerfeld to Hendrik Lorentz, 26 December 1907,
Folsing, Albert Einstein, 203.
126 Your letter made me uncommonly happy: Einstein to Sommerfeld, 14 January 1908,
CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 72, p. 5.
126 I believe that we are still: Einstein to Sommerfeld, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 72, p. 5.
127 There can be no doubt: Albert Einstein, “On the Present Status of the Radiation
Problem” [original article no. 10 in References], reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 56,
pp. 360–361.
127 Though every physicist: Ibid., 363.
127 In my opinion, the last: Ibid., 369.
127 the fundamental [Maxwell] equation: Ibid., 374.
128 I am ceaselessly concerned: Einstein to Laub, 17 May 1909, CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 160, p.
119.

CHAPTER 16. CREATIVE FUSION
Page
129 I am very sorry: Einstein to George Meyer, 7 June 1909, CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 166, p.
167.

129 Your postcard made me: Einstein to Anna Meyer-Schmid, 12 May 1909, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 154, p. 115.
130 With that kind of fame: Isaacson, Einstein, 154.
130 That’s not true, Herr Einstein: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 92.
130 my lectures keep me very busy: Einstein to Besso, 17 November 1909, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 187, p. 140.
131 I am sending you a short paper: Einstein to Lorentz, 30 March 1909, CPAE, vol. 5, doc.
146, p. 105.
131 a real event: Einstein to Lorentz, 13 April 1909, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 149, p. 106.
132 their existence [free electrons] in metals: Lorentz to Einstein, 6 May 1909, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 153, p. 108.
132 If one regards h: Ibid., 110.
132 The individuality of each: Ibid., 112.
132 as soon as one makes: Ibid., 113.
132 permit me to say: Ibid., 114.
133 I am presently carrying on: Einstein to Laub, 19 May 1909, ibid., 119.
134 My work on light quanta: Ibid.
134 delighted … the di culty of generalizing: Einstein to Lorentz, 23 May 1909, CPAE, vol.
5, doc. 163, p. 122.
134 I consider it a great blessing: Ibid.
135 energy elements … play a certain: Planck to Lorentz, 10 July 1909, in Hermann,
Genesis of Quantum Theory, 41.
135 stubbornly opposes: Einstein to Johannes Stark, 31 July 1909, CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 172,
p. 129.
135 The quarrel between Stark and Sommerfeld (quoted in footnote): Einstein to Laub, 16
March 1910, CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 199, p. 148.
136 one of the turning points: Folsing, Einstein, 257.
136 Once it has been recognized … However, today we must: Einstein, “On the Development
of Our Views,” 379.
137 It is therefore my opinion that the next stage: Ibid.
137 Regarding our conception of the structure of light: Ibid., 386.
138 to accept Planck’s theory: Ibid., 390.
138 Isn’t it conceivable: Ibid.
139 The forces of pressure exerted: Ibid., 391.
140 it has not yet been possible: Ibid., 394.
140 listening with greatest interest: “Discussion Following the Lecture: On the Development
of Our Views concerning the Nature and Constitution of Radiation” [original article

no. 12 in References], reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 61, pp. 395–396.
140 It had no [great e ect]: Hermann, Genesis of Quantum Theory, 68.

CHAPTER 17. THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING NERNST
Page
141 I visited Prof. Einstein in Zurich: W. Nernst to A. Schuster, 10 March 1910, in Barkan,
Walther Nernst, 183.
141 Einstein’s achievement received its seal: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 257.
142 the best that any laboratory practitioner: Co ey, Cathedrals of Science, 18.
142

shlike mouth; … in the main, popular…; and the Perrin anecdote: Robert A. Millikan,
“A Great Physicist Passes,” Scienti c Monthly, vol. 54, pp. 84–86 (1942).

142 his truly amazing scienti c instinct: Albert Einstein, “The Work and Personality of
Walther Nernst,” Scienti c Monthly, vol. 54, pp. 195–196 (1942).
144 How much did you get: Co ey, Cathedrals of Science, 29–30.
144 versatile, many-faceted: Barkan, Walther Nernst, 148.
144 Kommerzienrat: Phillip Frank, Einstein: His Life and Times, trans. George Rosen, ed.
Schuichi Kusaka (New York: Da Capo Press, 1947), 107.
146 rather shabby attire: Seelig, Albert Einstein, 100.
146 I am most interested in the associate professor: George Bredig to Arrhenius, in Barkan,
Walther Nernst, 183–4.
146 made Einstein famous: Kuhn, Black-Body Theory, 215.
147 I visited Prof. Einstein … “a beautiful memory”: Nernst to A. Schuster, 10 March 1910,
in Barkan, Walther Nernst, 183.
147 The speci c heat decreases (quoted in footnote): 17 February 1910, ibid., 167.
148 I have made inquiries: W. Nernst postcard, recipient unknown, 31 July 1910, ibid.
148 For me the theory of quanta: Einstein to Laub, 16 March 1910, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 199,
pp. 148–149.
148 It seems incontrovertible: Einstein to Sommerfeld, July 1910, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 211, p.
157.
148 The crucial point in the whole question: Ibid.

CHAPTER 18. LAMENTING THE RUINS
Page
149 As for knowing, nobody knows anything: Einstein to Zangger, 15 November 1911,
CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 305, p. 221.

149 I decided to take as my starting point: Marage and Wallenborn, eds., Solvay Councils,
10–11.
150 the report he was good enough to send: Ibid., 95.
151 chasing after modernity: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 273.
151 in boldness [surpassing] anything: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 271.
151 great theoretical papers in the area of thermodynamics (quoted in footnote): Emil
Fischer to Einstein, October–November 1910, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 230, p. 165.
152 the air is full of soot: Einstein to Hans Tanner, 24 April 1911, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 265,
p. 186.
152 semi-barbaric: Einstein to Zangger, 20 September 1911, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 286, p.
207.
152 a good thing for the Polytechnic: Einstein to Zangger, date unknown (after 5 June
1912), Folsing, Albert Einstein, 79.
153 as soon as one makes even the slightest: Lorentz to Einstein, 6 May 1909, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 153, p. 113.
153 it has not been possible to formulate: Einstein, “On the Development of Our Views,”
394.
153 I have not yet arrived at solution: Einstein to Laub, 31 December 1909, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 196, p. 146.
153 maybe the electron is not: Einstein to Sommerfeld, 19 January 1910, CPAE, vol. 5, doc.
197, pp. 146–147.
154 [a] crudely materialistic conception: Einstein to Sommerfeld, July 1910, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 211, p. 157.
154 I have not made any progress: Einstein to Laub, 27 August 1910, CPAE, vol. 5, doc.
224, p. 162.
154 At the moment I am very hopeful: Einstein to Laub, 4 November 1910, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 231, p. 166.
154 The solution of the radiation problem: Einstein to Laub, 11 November 1910, CPAE, vol.
5, doc. 233, p. 167.
154 the riddle of radiation: Einstein to Laub, 28 December 1910, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 241, p.
141.
155 the so-called quantum theory of today: Barkan, Walther Nernst, 165.
156 I no longer ask whether these quanta: Einstein to Besso, 13 May 1911, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 267, p. 187.
157 Dear Sir, To all appearances: Ernest Solvay to Einstein, 9 June 1911, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 269, pp. 190–191.
157 The relativistic treatment of gravitation: Einstein to Laub, 10 August 1911, CPAE, vol.
5, doc. 275, p. 197.
157 If my answer is not … thorough: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 285.

157 We stand here before an unsolved puzzle: Albert Einstein, “On the Present State of the
Problem of Speci c Heats” [original article no. 13 in References], reprinted in CPAE,
vol. 2, doc. 26, pp. 419–420.
158 H. A. Lorentz chaired the conference: Einstein to Zangger, 7 November 1911, CPAE,
vol. 5, doc. 303, pp. 219–220.
158 he is a completely honest man: Ibid., 220.
158 In Brussels, too: Einstein to Besso, 26 December 1911, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 331, p. 241.
158 the h-disease looks ever more hopeless: Einstein to Lorentz, 23 November 1911, CPAE,
vol. 5, doc. 313, p. 227.
158 I took as my starting point: Marage and Wallenborn, eds., Solvay Councils, 11.
158 I’m working at full speed: Einstein to Alfred Stern, 17 March 1912, CPAE, vol. 5, doc.
374, p. 275.
158 I assure you that I have nothing: Einstein to Sommerfeld, 29 October 1912, CPAE, vol.
5, doc. 421, p. 324.
159 My letter to Einstein proved useless: Sommerfeld to Hilbert, 1 November 1912, in
Hermann, Genesis of Quantum Theory, 69.
159 his sense of humor: Frank, Einstein, 76.
159 There are the madmen: Ibid., 98.

CHAPTER 19. A COSMIC INTERLUDE
Page
160 Scienti c endeavors are quite extraordinary: Einstein to Walter Dallenbach, 31 May
1915, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 87, p. 103.
161 The question arises whether this statement: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 339.
162 one of the highest achievements: Ibid., 444.
162 probably the greatest scienti c discovery: Isaacson, Einstein, 223.
162 the greatest feat of human thinking: Ibid., 223–224.
162 The theory is of incomparable beauty: Einstein to Zangger, 26 November 1915, CPAE,
vol. 8, doc. 152, p. 151.
162 my boldest dreams: Einstein to Besso, 10 December 1915, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 162, p.
160.
163 enchanted me: Einstein to Sommerfeld, 8 February 1916, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 189, p.
192.
163 among my nest experiences: Einstein to Sommerfeld, 3 August 1916, CPAE, vol. 8,
doc. 246, p. 241.
163 A brilliant idea has dawned: Einstein to Besso, 11 August 1916, CPAE, vol. 8, doc.
250, p. 241.

165 I can’t even begin to tell: Einstein to Elsa, 30 April 1912, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 389, p.
291.
165 the chances of my getting a call: Ibid.
165 it will not be good: Einstein to Elsa, 21 May 1912, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 399, p. 300.
166 tear of joy: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 332.
166 The undersigned are aware (quoted in footnote): 12 June 1913, CPAE, vol. 5, doc.
445, p. 38.
167 because it would not make me happy: Frank, Einstein, 109.
167 I couldn’t resist the temptation: Einstein to Lorentz, 14 August 1913, in Folsing,
Einstein, 331.
167 I accepted this odd sinecure: Einstein to Paul Ehrenfest, undated, 1913, ibid.
167 howled unceasingly: High eld and Carter, Private Lives, 164.
167 In personal respects: Einstein to Zangger, 7 July 1915, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 94, p. 110.

CHAPTER 20. BOHR’S ATOMIC SONATA
Page
168 Europe in its madness: Einstein to Ehrenfest, 19 August 1914, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 34, p.
41.
168 unworthy of what until now: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 346.
169 the international catastrophe: Ibid., 347.
170 Bohr is di erent: William Cropper, Great Physicists: The Life and Times of Leading
Physicists from Galileo to Hawking (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 245.
170 full of characters from all parts: Ibid.
171 I got a vivid account: Marage and Wallenborn, eds., Solvay Councils, 110.
173 I really think you should abbreviate: Jagdish Mehra and Helmut Rechenberg, The
Historical Development of Quantum Theory, vol. 1, part 1 (New York: Springer-Verlag,
1982), 190. (Cited hereinafter as Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT.)
173 in an attempt to explain: N. Bohr, “On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules”
[original article no. 14 in References], reprinted in Haar, The Old Quantum Theory,
pp. 132–133.
174 The general importance: Ibid., 137.
174 For me the only di culty: Einstein to Lorentz, 23 May 1909, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 163, p.
122.
177 How much the above interpretation: Bohr, “On the Constitution,” 149.
178 obviously, we get in this way: Ibid., 150.
179 we came to speak of Bohr’s theory: Stachel, Einstein from B to Z, 369–370.

179 I told him [the explanation …]: Ibid.
180 All my attempts, however, to adapt: Albert Einstein, “The Advent of Quantum Theory,”
Science, vol. 113, pp. 82–84 (1951).

CHAPTER 21. RELYING ON CHANCE
Page
181 Fundamental as [the relativity theory] of Einstein: CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 445, pp. 337–338.
181 Why Planck and I engaged him: Barkan, Walther Nernst, 186.
182 One cannot seriously believe: Einstein to Wilhelm Wien, 17 May 1912, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 395, p. 298.
182 the process of absorption: Einstein to Michele Besso, 11 September 1911, CPAE, vol. 5,
doc. 283, p. 204.
183 Einstein always wracked his brain: Woolf, ed., Some Strangeness in Proportion, 254.
184 My measurements … agree everywhere: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 1, part 1,
p. 220.
184 Now I believe in relativity theory: Ibid., footnote 366, p. 231.
184 a revelation: Einstein to Sommerfeld, 8 February 1916, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 189, p.
192.
184 your spectral analyses: Einstein to Sommerfeld, 3 August 1916, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 246,
p. 241.
184 his derivation was of unparalleled boldness: Albert Einstein, “Emission and Absorption
of Radiation in Quantum Theory” [original article no. 15 in References], reprinted in
CPAE, vol. 6, doc. 34, p. 212.
186 We shall distinguish here: Ibid., 214.
187 The simplicity of the hypotheses: Ibid., 215–216.
187 A brilliant idea has dawned: Einstein to Besso, 11 August 1916, CPAE, vol. 8, doc.
250, p. 243.
188 it can be demonstrated convincingly: Einstein to Besso, 24 August 1916, CPAE, vol. 8,
doc. 251, p. 244.
188 this derivation deserves attention: Albert Einstein, “On the Quantum Theory of
Radiation” [original article no. 16 in References], reprinted in CPAE, vol. 6, doc. 38,
pp. 220–221.
188 The question arises: does the molecule: Ibid., p. 221.
192 If we were to modify: Ibid., p. 232.
192 [Einstein] himself, in his paper of [1917]: Werner Heisenberg, Encounters with Einstein:
And Other Essays on People, Places, and Particles. (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1989), 115.

192 the molecule su ers a recoil: Einstein, “On the Quantum Theory of Radiation,” 232.
192 any such elementary process: Einstein to Besso, 6 September 1916, CPAE, vol. 8, doc.
254, p. 246.

CHAPTER 22. CHAOTIC GHOSTS
Page
193 I have
348.

rmly decided: Einstein to Elsa, 11 August 1913, CPAE, vol. 5, doc. 466, p.

193 turnip winter: Thomas Levenson, Einstein in Berlin (New York: Bantam Books, 2003),
142.
194 famous complaint: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 406.
194 I am quite in rm: Einstein to Paul Ehrenfest, 14 February 1917, CPAE, vol. 8, doc.
298, p. 295.
194 I have not been working much: Einstein to Lorentz, 3 April 1917, CPAE, vol. 8, doc.
322, p. 313.
194 raise the necessary superstition: Einstein to Besso, 8 May 1917, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 335,
p. 325.
194 I am committing myself: Einstein to Besso, 13 May 1917, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 339, p.
330.
194 I have come to know: Einstein to Zangger, 10 March 1917, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 309, p.
299.
194 My health is quite fair: Einstein to Zangger, 6 December 1917, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 404,
p. 412.
195 Elsa indefatigably cooking: Einstein to Besso, 28 June 1918, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 572, p.
598.
196 The quantum paper I sent: Einstein to Besso, 9 March 1917, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 306, p.
292.
196 scienti c life has dozed: Einstein to Zangger, 10 March 1917, CPAE, vol. 8, doc. 310,
p. 300.
197 I am convinced that besides: Einstein to Arnold Sommerfeld, 9 October 1921, CPAE,
vol. 12, doc. 261, p. 168.
197 Basic idea: … Upon: Lorentz to Einstein, 13 November, 1921, CPAE, vol. 12, doc.
298, p. 184.
198 quite fond of it: Abraham Pais, Inward Bound: Of Matter and Forces in the Physical
World (New York: Clarendon Press, 1986), 259.
198 It has to be assumed: Ibid.
201 yesterday I presented a little thing: Einstein to Besso, 29 April 1917, CPAE, vol. 8, doc.
331, p. 322.

201 it still remains unsatisfying: Albert Einstein, “On the Quantum Theorem of Sommerfeld
and Epstein” [original article no. 17 in References], reprinted in CPAE, vol. 6, doc.
45, p. 436.
202 we now come to a very essential point: Ibid., 439.
202 One notices immediately: Ibid., 440.
203 The framing of the quantum conditions: Erwin Schrödinger, “Quantization as an
Eigenvalue Problem, Part II,” in Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics, 2nd edition,
1928, translated 1978 (New York: Chelsea Publishing, 1978), 17.

CHAPTER 23. FIFTEEN MILLION MINUTES OF FAME
Page
204 But now I’m just about fed up: Einstein to Elsa, 8 January 1921, CPAE, vol. 12, doc.
12, p. 3.
205 a Greek drama: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 442–443.
205 one of the highest achievements: Ibid., 444.
205 Lights All Askew: Digital facsimiles of the original New York Times article can be
viewed online at, for example: Yeshiva University, Einstein and Yeshiva Digital
Exhibit,
http://yu.edu/libraries/digital_library/einstein/Einstein11-10-19nyt.pdf,
accessed March 31, 2013.
205 At present every coachman: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 455.
205 from the intellectual work of a quiet scholar: Ibid.
206 the fragmentation of one’s intentions: Einstein to Zangger, 16 January 1921, CPAE, vol.
12, doc. 5, p. 9.
207 Everyone must, from time to time: Einstein to Max and Hedwig Born, 9 September
1920, in Folsing, Albert Einstein, 464.
207 sound common sense: Ibid., 465.
207 [he] has so far achieved nothing: Ibid.
207 I feel like a man lying: Ibid., 463; Einstein interview of August 29, 1920.
208 It cannot be our task: Ibid.
208 there is in me nothing: Ibid., 494.
208 The [religious Jewish] community: Einstein to Rabbi Warschauer, 8 March 1921, CPAE,
vol. 12, doc. 86, p. 69.
209 I am not needed for my abilities: Einstein to Haber, 9 March 1921, CPAE, vol. 12, doc.
88, p. 71.
210 very interesting and quite simple: Einstein to Born, 22 August 1921, CPAE, vol. 12, doc.
211, p. 143.

211 Thanks to the excellent collaboration: Einstein to Born, 30 December 1921, CPAE, vol.
12, doc. 345, p. 211.
211 I … committed a monumental blunder: Einstein to Born, beginning of May 1922, in The
Born-Einstein Letters, 1916–1955: Friendship, Politics and Physics in Uncertain Times,
trans. Irene Born (New York: MacMillan, 1971), 68.
211 I suppose it is a good thing: Einstein to Ehrenfest, 15 March 1922, in Folsing, Albert
Einstein, 512.
212 a downright normal human existence: Einstein to H. Anschuz-Kaempfe, 12 July 1922,
ibid., 521.
212 I am constantly being warned: Einstein to M. Solovine, 16 July 1922, ibid., 522.
212 the opportunity of a prolonged absence: Einstein to Wilhelm Solf, 20 December 1922,
ibid., 525.
212 it will probably be very desirable: Arrhenius to Einstein, 18 September 1922, ibid., 535.
212 quite unable to postpone: Einstein to Arrhenius, 20 September 1922, ibid.
213 I spent ten years: Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, 357.
213 The other great problem: Einstein recording for Preusssischen Staatsbibliothek, 1924,
quoted in M. J. Klein, “No Firm Foundation: Einstein and the Early Quantum
Theory,” in Woolf, ed., Some Strangeness in Proportion, 182.

CHAPTER 24. THE INDIAN COMET
Page
215 Respected Sir: I have ventured: John Stachel, “Einstein and Bose,” in Einstein from B to
Z, vol. 9, p. 524.
216 I do not know su cient German: Ibid.
216 In my opinion Bose’s derivation: S. N. Bose, “Planck’s Law and the Light Quantum
Hypothesis” [original article no. 18 in References], reprinted in O. Theimer and B.
Ram, “The Beginning of Quantum Statistics,” American Journal of Physics, vol. 44, pp.
1056–1057 (1976), p. 1056.
216 about 300 words (quoted in footnote): Jurgen Ne e, Einstein: A Biography, trans.
Shelley Frisch (New York: Farrar Strauss Giroux, 2007), 372.
217 a particularly brilliant lot: Stachel, “Einstein and Bose,” 520.
218 notorious for plain speaking: K. Wali, “The Man Behind Bose Statistics,” Physics Today,
October 2006, p. 48.
218 you may have done well in the examination: Ibid.
218 Disappointed, I came away: Ibid.
218 spent many sleepless nights: W. Blanpied, “Satyendranath Bose: Co-founder of
Quantum Statistics,” American Journal of Physics, September 1972, p. 1215.

218 As a teacher: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 1, part 2, p. 565.
220 Planck’s formula … forms the starting point: Bose, “Planck’s Law and the Light
Quantum,” 1056.
220 could be deduced only: Ibid.
220 However I do not nd your objection: Stachel, “Einstein and Bose,” 524.
222 the fourth and last: Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, 425.
223 It is now very simple: Bose, “Planck’s Law and the Light Quantum,” 1057.
223 I had no idea: Jagdish Mehra, “Satyendra Nath Bose,” Biographical Memoirs of Fellows
of the Royal Society, November 1975, p. 128.
224 [the Bose] derivation is elegant: Einstein to Ehrenfest, 12 July 1924, in Pais, Subtle Is
the Lord, 424.
225 contradicts the generally and rightly accepted: Albert Einstein, “ ‘Bose’s Second Paper: A
Con ict with Einstein,’ Comment on ‘Thermal equilibrium in the radiation eld in
the presence of matter,’ by S. N. Bose,” Physikalische Zeitschrift, vol. 27, p. 384
(1924), reprinted in O. Theimer and B. Ram, American Journal of Physics, vol. 45, pp.
242–246 (1976), p. 246.
225 solved all problems: Stachel, “Einstein and Bose,” 525.
225 work under you: Bose to Einstein, 26 October 1924, ibid.
225 I am glad I shall have: Einstein to Bose, 2 November 1924, ibid., 525–526.
226 because I was a teacher: Mehra, “Satyendra Nath Bose,” 136.
226 even more than forty years: Blanpied, “Satyendranath Bose,” 1217.
226 She was very nice … I wasn’t able: Mehra, “Satyendra Nath Bose,” 136.
226 the meeting was most interesting: Ibid., 141.
226 what the statistics of light quanta: Ibid.
227 I have made an honest resolution of: Stachel, “Einstein and Bose,” 527.
227 your senator McCarthy: Blanpied, “Satyendranath Bose,” 1217.
227 His indomitable will: Mehra, “Satyendra Nath Bose,” 145.
227 On my return: Ibid., 142.

CHAPTER 25. QUANTUM DICE
Page
228 I … am convinced that [God]: Einstein to Born, 4 December, 1926, in Folsing, Albert
Einstein, 585.
230 A quantum theory of the … ideal gas: Albert Einstein, “Quantum Theory of the
Monatomic Ideal Gas” [original article no. 20 in References], reprinted in translation

in, I. Duck and E.C.G. Sudarshan, eds., Pauli and the Spin-Statistics Theorem
(Singapore: World Scienti c, 1997), 82.
231 still obscure: Einstein to Ehrenfest, 12 July 1924, in Stachel, “Einstein and Bose,” 533.
231 the theory is pretty: Martin J. Klein, “Einstein and Wave-Particle Duality,” The Natural
Philosopher, vol. 3, p. 31 (1964).
231 The thing with the quantum gas: Einstein to Ehrenfest, 2 December 1924, in Mehra and
Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 2, p. 384.
235 When the Bose derivation: Albert Einstein, “Quantum Theory of the Monatomic Ideal
Gas, Part Two” [original article no. 21 in References], reprinted in translation in I.
Duck and E.C.G. Sudarshan, eds., Pauli and the Spin-Statistics Theorem (Singapore:
World Scienti c, 1997), 88.
236 I maintain that in this case: Ibid., 90.
238 Ehrenfest and others have reported: Ibid., 91.
240 your reproach is not unjusti ed: Einstein to Erwin Schrödinger, 28 February 1925, in
Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 2, p. 387.
240 only through your letter: Schrödinger to Einstein, 3 November 1925, ibid.

CHAPTER 26. THE ROYAL MARRIAGE: E = mc2 = hν
Page
241 I said to myself that classical physics: Interview of Louis de Broglie, Archives for the
History of Quantum Physics Collection, Niels Bohr Library and Archives, American
Institute of Physics, College Park, MD, www.aip.org/history/ohilist/LINK, p. 30,
translated from French by the author. (Cited hereinafter as de Broglie, AHQP
interview.)
241 A younger brother of: Einstein to Lorentz, 16 December 1924, in Mehra and
Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 1, part 2, p. 604.
241 a bit strange, but after all: De Broglie, AHQP interview, 7.
242 Louis de Broglie’s work: Ioan James, Remarkable Physicists, from Galileo to Yukawa
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 311.
242 at every stage of my life: B. R. Wheaton, The Tiger and the Shark: Empirical Roots of
Wave-Particle Dualism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), 274.
243 this little brother had become: A. Abragam, “Louis De Broglie,” Biographical Memoirs of
Fellows of the Royal Society, vol. 34, pp. 22–41 (1988), p. 26.
243 continue and prepare the diploma: De Broglie, AHQP interview, 30.
243 I could see that to do that it was necessary: Ibid.
243 between several intellectual directions: Ibid., 29.
243 The hesitations are over: Abragam, “Louis De Broglie,” 27.

243 I began to think about quanta: De Broglie, AHQP interview, 22.
244 with the ardor of my age: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 1, part 2, p. 582.
244 his enthusiasm was returning: Abragam, “Louis De Broglie,” 28.
244 regretted the interruption: Ibid.
244 because that put me: De Broglie, AHQP interview, 28.
244 There was really no career: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 1, part 2, p. 579.
245 I never had any doubt: De Broglie, AHQP interview, 22.
245 must be corpuscular: Wheaton, The Tiger and the Shark, 270.
245 a number of known results: Louis de Broglie, “Black Radiation and Light Quanta”
[original article no. 23 in References], reprinted in Louis de Broglie and Leon
Brillouin, Selected Papers on Wave Mechanics, 1–7 (London: Blackie and Sons, 1928),
1.
245 incomparable insight: Louis de Broglie, “Studies on the Theory of Quanta,” PhD thesis
[original article no. 25 in References], 3.
246 atoms of light: Ibid., 6.
246 a mixture of monatomic, diatomic, triatomic (quoted in footnote): De Broglie, “Black
Radiation,” 5.
247 Well, all this must be very similar: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 1, part 2, p.
586.
247 developed rapidly in the summer: De Broglie, AHQP interview, 25.
247 I got the idea that one had to extend: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 1, part 2, p.
587.
248 a meta law of Nature: De Broglie, PhD thesis, 8.
248 glides on its wave: Asim O. Barut, Alwyn van der Merwe, and Jean-Pierre Vigier, eds.,
Quantum Space and Time—the Quest Continues: Studies and Essays in Honour of Louis
De Broglie, Paul Dirac and Eugene Wigner (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1984), 18.
249 a very remarkable geometric interpretation: Einstein, “Quantum Theory of the
Monatomic Ideal Gas, Part Two,” 99.
249 It looks far-fetched: Abragam, “Louis De Broglie,” 30.
249 read my thesis during the summer: Louis de Broglie, AHQP interview, 7.
250 remarkable mastery … never has so much…. all I can tell you: Abragam, “Louis De
Broglie,” 30.
251 I believe that it is more: Einstein, “Quantum Theory of the Monatomic Ideal Gas, Part
Two,” 95.
251 this oscillating eld: Ibid., 96.
251 The scienti c world of the time: Klein, “Wave-Particle Duality.” 38.
251 the paper of de Broglie: Abragam, “Louis De Broglie,” 31.

252 By way of a detour: Klein, “Wave-Particle Duality,” 39.
252 there was no experimental evidence (quoted in footnote): Woolf, ed., Some Strangeness
in Proportion, footnote, p. 471.
253 uninspiring: Abragam, “Louis De Broglie,” 37.
253 dry and devoid of passion: Ibid.
253 not of the highest intellectual caliber: Ibid.
253 Yesterday I read: Ibid., 35.

CHAPTER 27. THE VIENNESE POLYMATH
Page
254 Physics does not consist: Schrödinger to Wilhelm Wien, 25 August 1926, in Walter
Moore, Schrödinger: Life and Thought (Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press,
1989), 226.
254 When you began this work: Schrödinger, Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics, preface,
v.
254 I have read your article: Einstein to Schrödinger, 2 April 1926, in Martin Klein, ed.,
Letters on Wave Mechanics (New York: Philosophical Library, 1967), 3.
254 the idea of your article: Einstein to Schrödinger, 16 April 1926, ibid., 24.
255 In my scienti c work: Moore, Schrödinger, 135.
255 devote himself to philosophy (quoted in footnote): Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol.
5, part 1, p. 225.
256 often been accused of irtatiousness: Erwin Schrödinger, What is Life? The Physical
Aspect of the Living Cell with Mind and Matter & Autobiographical Sketches (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1958), 167.
256 I must refrain from drawing: Ibid., 184.
256 who did not wish, in consequence (quoted in footnote): Moore, Schrödinger, 272.
256 I have trouble with Dirac (quoted in footnote): Helge S. Kragh, Dirac: A Scienti c
Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 82.
257 I was a good student: Ibid., 23.
257 only nd words of praise: Schrödinger, What is Life? 173.
257 I can’t recall a single instance: Moore, Schrödinger, 23.
257 das ist der Schrödinger … this man … a ery spirit: Ibid., 46.
257 would translate Homer: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 1, p. 67.
257 hours of leisure: Ibid., 68.
257 if it were not for the mathematics: Moore, Schrödinger, 97.
258 I learnt to appreciate: Schrödinger, What is Life? 169.

258 his fearlessness and calmness: Moore, Schrödinger, 93.
258 I was impressed by him: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 1, p. 177.
258 I know it would be easier: Moore, Schrödinger, 131.
259 No perception in physics: Schrödinger, What is Life? 168.
260 beautiful work: Schrödinger to Bohr, 7 February 1921, in Mehra and Rechenberg,
HDQT, vol. 5, part 1, p. 306.
260 [your paper] interested me very much: Bohr to Schrödinger, 15 June 1921, ibid., 307.
261 originality of [Einstein’s] statistical method: Schrödinger to Einstein, 3 November 1925,
in Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 2, p. 387.
261 in order that two molecules: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 1, p. 365.
261 I have read with great interest: Einstein to Schrödinger, 26 September 1925, in Mehra
and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 2, p. 397.
262 the basic idea is yours: Schrödinger to Einstein, 3 November 1925, ibid., 398.
262 since you have performed: Einstein to Schrödinger, 14 November 1925, ibid.
262 not even jokingly: Schrödinger to Einstein, 4 December 1925, ibid., 398–399.
262 because of it, section 8: Schrödinger to Einstein, 3 November 1925, ibid., 412.
262 return to wave theory: Schrödinger to Alfred Lande, 16 November 1925, ibid., 418.
263 nothing else but taking seriously: Klein, “Wave-Particle Duality,” 43.
263 Wave mechanics was born: Moore, Schrödinger, 188.
263 I see no basic di erence (quoted in footnote): Einstein to Schrödinger, 22 April 1926,
in Klein, ed., Letters on Wave Mechanics, 25.
263 did his great work (quoted in footnote): Pais, Inward Bound, 252.
266 in this paper, I wish: Schrödinger, Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics, 1.
266 It is, of course, strongly suggested: Ibid., 9.
266 Above all, I wish to mention: Ibid.
266 My theory was inspired: Ibid., footnote, p. 46.
267 What is more magni cent: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 1, p. 1.
267 the most astonishing: Moore, Schrödinger, 2.

CHAPTER 28. CONFUSION AND THEN UNCERTAINTY
Page
268 If we are still going to have to: Moore, Schrödinger, 228.
268 I am convinced that you have made a decisive advance: Einstein to Schrödinger, 26
April 1926, in Klein, ed., Letters on Wave Mechanics, 28.
269 appears rather mystifying: Born to Einstein, 15 July 1925, in Born-Einstein Letters, 82.

269 my beloved master: Schilpp, ed., Albert Einstein, 177.
269 I was from the beginning quite crushed: Lindley, Uncertainty, 90.
269 he looked like a simple peasant: Bartel Leendert Van der Waerden, ed., Sources of
Quantum Mechanics (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1967), 19.
269 very quiet and friendly: Lindley, Uncertainty, 90.
270 right now physics is very confused: Ibid., 108.
271 joie de vivre and hope: Ibid., 116.
271 based exclusively on relationships: Ibid., 115.
271 Heisenberg has: Einstein to Ehrenfest, 30 September 1920, Folsing, Albert Einstein,
566.
271 the most interesting thing: Einstein to Besso, 25 December 1925, ibid., 580.
272 Heisenberg’s paper came out: Mehra, “Satyendra Nath Bose,” 141.
272 more and more I tend: Einstein to Ehrenfest, 12 February 1926, in Mehra and
Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 2, p. 637.
272 made much more of an impression: Interview of Max Born by Archives for the History
of Quantum Physics Collection, Niels Bohr Library and Archives, American Institute
of Physics, College Park, MD, www.aip.org/history/ohilist/LINK, p. 23. (Cited
hereinafter as Born, AHQP interview.)
273 not such an infernal machine: Folsing, Albert Einstein, 582.
273 Schrödinger has come out with: Einstein to Besso, Einstein Besso Correspondance, 225.
273 People were packed: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 5, part 2, p. 636.
273 discouraged, if not repelled: Schrödinger, Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics, footnote,
p. 46.
273 what [he] writes about Anschaulichkeit: Heisenberg to Pauli, 8 June 1926, Moore,
Schrödinger, 221.
274 thrown out of the room: Moore, Schrödinger, 222.
274 we suddenly found him: Stachel, “Einstein and Bose,” 527.
275 We are all here fascinated: Einstein to Epstein, 10 June 1926, in Folsing, Albert
Einstein, 583.
276 I saw Franck counting particles: Born, AHQP interview, 25.
276 I discussed this with him: Ibid., 26.
277 Here the whole problem of determinism: Pais, Inward Bound, 257.
277 the motion of particles follows: Ibid., 258.
277 acrimonious debate … he believed: Born, AHQP interview, 25.
277 I am entirely satis ed: Born to Einstein, 30 November 1926, Mehra and Rechenberg,
HDQT, vol. 6, part 1, p. 243. (This letter is not in the published Born-Einstein
correspondence.)

277 Quantum mechanics calls for: Einstein to Born, 1926, in Folsing, Albert Einstein, 585.
278 isn’t that precisely: Stachel, “Einstein and the Quantum,” 388.
278 possibly I did … but it is nonsense. … It is the theory: Ibid.
278 It must have been one evening: Stachel, “Einstein and the Quantum,” 388.
278 A good joke (quoted in footnote): Frank, Einstein, 216.

CHAPTER 29: NICHT DIESE TÖNE
Page
279 All the fty years: Einstein to Besso, 12 December 1951, in Einstein Besso
Correspondance, 453.
279 Here I sit: Einstein, “Autobiographical Notes,” 3.
279 only a temporary way out: Ibid., 51.
280 I know this business: Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, 449.
280 I am convinced that this theory: Ibid., 448.
282 Einstein is therefore clearly involved: Schilpp, ed., Albert Einstein, 174.
283 the years of searching: Alice Calaprice, The Quotable Einstein (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1996), 174.
283 it is my experience: Einstein, “Autobiographical Notes,” 89.
283 obviously not [a] satisfactory solution: Mehra and Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 1, part 2, p.
547.
284 the other day I was: M. Born to Bohr, 15 January 1925, ibid., 611.
284 to give our revolutionary e orts: N. Bohr to R. Fowler, 21 April 1925, in Mehra and
Rechenberg, HDQT, vol. 1, part 2, p. 613.
284 fond … [which] has a great similarity: Pais, Inward Bound, 259.
285 Do you really believe: Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, 5.
285 Physics is an attempt: Einstein, “Autobiographical Notes,” 81.
285 We have become Antipodean: Einstein to Born, 7 September 1944, Born-Einstein Letters,
146.
285 nothingness of the hopes: Einstein, “Autobiographical Notes,” 3.
285 out yonder there was this huge world: Ibid., 5.
285 I believe … that one of the strongest motives: Albert Einstein, “Principles of Research,”
in Ideas and Opinions, trans. Sonja Bargmann (New York: Random House, 1954), 225

REFERENCES
EINSTEIN’S WRITINGS AND CORRESPONDENCE
Einstein, Albert. “Autobiographical Notes.” In Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, pp. 1–94.
Edited by P. A. Schilpp. La Salle: Open Court, 1970.
Einstein, Albert. The Born-Einstein Letters, 1916–1955: Friendship, Politics and Physics in
Uncertain Times. Translated by Irene Born. New York: MacMillan, 1971.
Einstein, Albert. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Translated by Anna Beck and
consultation by Don Howard. 12 vols. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987–
2009. References are to the English translations unless otherwise noted.
Einstein, Albert. Einstein Besso Correspondance, 1903–1955. Translated into French by Pierre
Speziali. Paris: Hermann, 1972. English translations in the text by the author.
Einstein, Albert. Ideas and Opinions. Translated by Sonja Bargmann. New York: Random
House, 1954.

BIOGRAPHICAL WORKS ON EINSTEIN
Bernstein, Jeremy. Albert Einstein. Edited by Frank Kermode. New York: Penguin Books,
1973.
Calaprice, Alice. The Quotable Einstein. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996.
D’Amour, Thibault. Once Upon Einstein. Translated by Eric Novak. Wellesley: A. K. Peters,
2006.
Dukas, Helen, and Banesh Ho man, eds. Albert Einstein: The Human Side. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1979.
Folsing, Albrecht. Albert Einstein: A Biography. Translated and abridged by Ewald Osers.
New York: Penguin Press, 1998.
Frank, Phillip. Einstein: His Life and Times. Translated by George Rosen and edited by
Schuichi Kusaka. New York: Da Capo Press, 1947.
French, A. P., ed. Einstein: A Centenary Volume. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1979.
Hentschel, Ann M., and Gerd Grassho . Albert Einstein: Those Happy Bernese Years. Bern:
Staemp i, 2005.
High eld, Roger, and Paul Carter. The Private Lives of Albert Einstein. London: Faber &
Faber, 1993.
Ho mann, Banesh, with the collaboration of Helen Dukas. Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel.
New York: Viking Press, 1972.

Isaacson, Walter. Einstein: His Life and Universe. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001.
Levenson, Thomas. Einstein in Berlin. New York: Bantam Books, 2003.
Moszkowski, Alexander. Conversations with Einstein. Translated by Henry L. Brose. New
York: Horizon Press, 1970.
Ne e, Jurgen. Einstein: A Biography. Translated by Shelley Frisch. New York: Farrar Strauss
Giroux, 2007.
Pais, Abraham. Einstein Lived Here. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Pais, Abraham. Subtle Is the Lord. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Schilpp, P. A., ed., Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist. La Salle: Open Court, 1970.
Seelig, Carl. Albert Einstein: A Documentary Biography. Translated by Mervyn Savill. London:
Staples Press, 1956.
Woolf, Harry, ed. Some Strangeness in Proportion: Einstein Centennial. Reading: AddisonWesley, 1980.

EINSTEIN AND QUANTUM THEORY
Bolles, Edmund Blair. Einstein De ant: Genius versus Genius in the Quantum Revolution.
Washington, DC: John Henry Press, 2005.
Klein, Martin J. “Einstein and Wave-Particle Duality.” The Natural Philosopher, vol. 3, 1964,
pp. 1–49.
Stachel, John. “Einstein and the Quantum” and “Bose and Einstein.” In Einstein from B to Z,
vol. 9, pp. 367–444. Edited by Don Howard. Boston: Birkhauser, 2002.

QUANTUM THEORY AND QUANTUM MECHANICS
Haar, D. Ter. The Old Quantum Theory. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1967.
Hermann, Armin. The Genesis of Quantum Theory (1899–1913). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1971.
Kuhn, Thomas S. Black-Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity, 1894–1912. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1978.
Lindley, David. Uncertainty: Einstein, Bohr, and the Struggle for the Soul of Science. New York:
Doubleday, 2007.
Mehra, Jagdish, and Helmut Rechenberg. The Historical Development of Quantum Theory,
vols. 1–5. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1982–1987.
Pais, Abraham. Inward Bound: Of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. New York:
Clarendon Press, 1986.
Van der Waerden, Bartel Leendert, ed. Sources of Quantum Mechanics. Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 1967.
Wheaton, B. R. The Tiger and the Shark: Empirical Roots of Wave-Particle Dualism.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.

BIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL ON OTHER SCIENTISTS

Abragam, A. “Louis De Broglie.” Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society, vol.
34, 1988, pp. 22–41.
AHQP Interviews of Louis De Broglie, by T. S. Kuhn, A. George, and T. Kahan, on January
7 and 14, 1963. Archives for the History of Quantum Physics Collection, Niels Bohr
Library and Archives, American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD,
www.aip.org/history/ohilist/LINK.
AHQP Interview of Max Born, by T. S. Kuhn and F. Hund on October 17, 1962. Archives
for the History of Quantum Physics Collection, Niels Bohr Library and Archives,
American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD, www.aip.org/history/ohilist/LINK.
Barkan, Diana Kormos. Walther Nernst and the Transition to Modern Physical Science.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Barut, Asim O., Alwyn van der Merwe, and Jean-Pierre Vigier, eds. Quantum Space and
Time—the Quest Continues: Studies and Essays in Honour of Louis De Broglie, Paul Dirac
and Eugene Wigner. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Blanpied, W. “Satyendranath Bose: Co-founder of Quantum Statistics.” American Journal of
Physics, September 1972, pp. 1212–1220.
Co ey, Patrick. Cathedrals of Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Crawford, Elisabeth. “Arrhenius, the Atomic Hypothesis, and the 1908 Nobel Prizes in
Physics and Chemistry.” Isis, vol. 75, 1984, pp. 503–22.
Cropper, William. Great Physicists: The Life and Times of Leading Physicists from Galileo to
Hawking. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Crowther, James Gerald. Scienti c Types. New York: Dufour, 1970.
Duck, Ian, and E.C.G. Sudarshan, eds. 100 Years of Planck’s Quantum. Singapore: World
Scienti c Publishing, 2000.
Heilbron, J. L. Dilemmas of an Upright Man: Max Planck as Spokesman for German Science.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986.
Heisenberg, Werner. Encounters with Einstein: And Other Essays on People, Places, and
Particles. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989.
Heisenberg, Werner. Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science. World
Perspectives, vol. 19. Edited by Ruth Nanda Anshen. New York: Harper & Brothers,
1958.
Klein, Martin J., ed. Letters on Wave Mechanics. New York: Philosophical Library, 1967.
Klein, Martin J. Paul Ehrenfest: The Making of a Theoretical Physicist, vol. 1. Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1970.
Lorentz, H. A. Impressions of His Life and Work. Edited by G. L. de Haas-Lorentz.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1957.
Kragh, Helge S., Dirac: A Scienti c Biography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1990.
Marage, Pierre, and Grégoire Wallenborn, eds. The Solvay Councils and the Birth of Modern
Physics. Science Networks, vol. 22. Basel: Birkauser Verlag, 1999.
Maxwell, J. C. The Scienti c Papers of James Clerk Maxwell, vol. 2. Edited by W. D. Niven.
Dover, NY: Dover Publications, 1965.

Maxwell, James Clerk. “Molecules.” Nature, September 1873, pp. 437–441, Victorian Web,
http://www.victorianweb.org/science/maxwell/molecules.html, accessed July 20,
2008.
Mehra, Jagdish. “Satyendra Nath Bose.” Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society,
vol. 21, 1975, pp. 117–154.
Mendelssohn, K. The World of Walther Nernst: The Rise and Fall of German Science, 1864–
1941. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1973.
Moore, Walter. Schrödinger: Life and Thought. Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press,
1989.
Nagel, Bengt. “The Discussion Concerning the Nobel Prize for Max Planck.” In Science,
Technology and Society in the Time of Alfred Nobel: Nobel Symposium 52. Edited by C. G.
Bernhard, E. Crawford, and P. Sorbom. New York: Pergamon Press, 1982.
Pais, Abraham. Subtle Is the Lord. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Planck, Max. Scienti c Biography and Other Papers, 1949. Translated by Frank Gaynor. New
York: Philosophical Library, 1949.
Schrödinger, Erwin. What Is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell with Mind and Matter
& Autobiographical Sketches. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1958.
Scott, William T. Erwin Schrödinger: An Introduction to His Writings. Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press, 1967.
Stachel, John. “Einstein and Bose.” In Einstein from B to Z, vol. 9, pp. 519–538. Edited by
John Stachel and Don Howard. Boston: Birkhauser, 2002.
Strutt, Robert John. The Life of Lord Rayleigh. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press,
1968.
Tolstoy, Ivan. James Clerk Maxwell. Edinburgh: Canongate, 1981.
Wali, K. “The Man behind Bose Statistics.” Physics Today, October 2006, p. 46.

ORIGINAL SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ARTICLES
(CHRONOLOGICAL)
1. Max Planck, “On an Improvement of Wien’s Equation for the Spectrum,” Proceedings of
the German Physical Society, vol. 2, p. 202 (1900); reprinted in translation in Haar, The
Old Quantum Theory, 79–81.
2. Max Planck, “On the Theory of the Energy Distribution Law of the Normal Spectrum,”
Proceedings of the German Physical Society, vol. 2, p. 237 (1900); reprinted in translation
in Haar, The Old Quantum Theory, 82–90.
3. Lord Rayleigh, “Remarks upon the Law of Complete Radiation,” Philosophical Magazine,
vol. 49, pp. 539–40 (1900); reprinted in Scienti c Papers by Lord Rayleigh, vol. 6, doc.
260, pp. 483–485, Dover, New York (1964).
4. Lord Rayleigh, “The Law of Partition of Kinetic Energy,” Philosophical Magazine, vol.
49, pp. 98–118 (1900); reprinted in Scienti c Papers by Lord Rayleigh, vol. 6, doc. 253,
pp. 433–451, Dover, New York (1964).
5. Albert Einstein, “On the General Molecular Theory of Heat,” Annalen der Physik, vol.
14, pp. 354–362 (1904); reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 5, pp. 68–77.

6.

Albert Einstein, “On a Heuristic Point of View concerning the Production and
Transformation of Light,” Annalen der Physik, vol. 17, pp. 132–148 (1905); reprinted in
CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 14, pp. 86–103.
7. Albert Einstein, “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,” Annalen der Physik, vol.
17, pp. 891–921 (1905); reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 23, pp. 140–171.
8. Albert Einstein, “On the Theory of Light Production and Light Absorption,” Annalen der
Physik, vol. 20, p. 199 (1906); reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 34, pp. 192–199.
9.
Albert Einstein, “Planck’s Theory of Radiation and the Theory of Speci c Heat,”
Annalen der Physik, vol. 22, pp. 180–190 (1907); reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 38, pp.
214–224.
10. Albert Einstein, “On the Present Status of the Radiation Problem,” Physikalische
Zeitschrift, vol. 10, pp. 185–193 (1909); reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 56, pp. 357–
375.
11. Albert Einstein, “On the Development of Our Views concerning the Nature and
Constitution of Radiation,” Physikalische Zeitschrift, vol. 10, pp. 817–826 (1909),
presented at the 81st Meeting of the German Scientists and Physicians, Salzburg,
September 21, 1909; reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 60, pp. 379–394.
12. “Discussion Following the Lecture: On the Development of Our Views concerning the
Nature and Constitution of Radiation,” Physikalische Zeitschrift, vol. 10, pp. 825–826
(1909), presented at the 81st Meeting of the German Scientists and Physicians,
September 21, 1909; reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc. 61, pp. 395–398.
13. Albert Einstein, “On the Present State of the Problem of Speci c Heats,” Proceedings of
the Solvay Conference, October 30–November 3, 1911; reprinted in CPAE, vol. 2, doc.
26, pp. 419–420.
14. Niels Bohr, “On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules,” Philosophical Magazine, vol.
26, p. 1 (1913); reprinted in The Old Quantum Theory, by D. Ter Haar, pp. 132–159.
15. Albert Einstein, “Emission and Absorption of Radiation in Quantum Theory,”
Proceedings of the German Physical Society, vol. 18, pp. 318–323 (1916); reprinted in
CPAE, vol. 6, doc. 34, pp. 212–216.
16. Albert Einstein, “On the Quantum Theory of Radiation,” Physikalische Gesellschaft
Zurich, Mitteilungen, vol. 18 (1916); reprinted in CPAE, vol. 6, doc. 38, pp. 220–233.
17. Albert Einstein, “On the Quantum Theorem of Sommerfeld and Epstein,” Proceedings of
the German Physical Society, vol. 19 (1917); reprinted in CPAE, vol. 6, doc. 45, pp. 434–
443.
18. S. N. Bose, “Planck’s Law and the Light Quantum Hypothesis,” Zeitschrift für Physik, vol.
26, p. 178 (1924); reprinted in O. Theimer and B. Ram, “The Beginning of Quantum
Statistics,” American. Journal of Physics, vol. 44, pp. 1056–1057 (1976).
19. S. N. Bose, “Thermal Equilibrium in the Radiation Field in the Presence of Matter,”
Zeitschrift für Physik, vol. 27, p. 384 (1924); reprinted in O. Theimer and B. Ram,
“Bose’s Second Paper: A Con ict with Einstein,” American Journal of Physics, vol. 45,
pp. 242–246 (1976).
20. Albert Einstein, “Quantum Theory of the Monatomic Ideal Gas,” Proceedings of the
Prussian Academy of Sciences, vol. 22, p. 261 (1924); reprinted in translation in I. Duck
and E.C.G. Sudarshan, eds., Pauli and the Spin-Statistics Theorem, World Scienti c,
Singapore (1997), 82–87.

21. Albert Einstein, “Quantum Theory of the Monatomic Ideal Gas, Part Two,” Proceedings
of the Prussian Academy of Sciences, vol. 1, p. 3 (1925); reprinted in translation in I.
Duck and E.C.G. Sudarshan, eds., Pauli and the Spin-Statistics Theorem, World Scienti c,
Singapore (1997), 89–99.
22. Albert Einstein, “On the Quantum Theory of the Ideal Gas,” Proceedings of the Prussian
Academy of Sciences, vol. 3, p. 18 (1925); reprinted in translation in I. Duck and E.C.G.
Sudarshan, eds., Pauli and the Spin-Statistics Theorem, World Scienti c, Singapore
(1997), 100–107.
23. Louis de Broglie, “Black Radiation and Light Quanta,” Journal de Physique et le Radium,
vol. 3, p. 422 (1922); reprinted in Selected Papers on Wave Mechanics by Louis de Broglie
and Leon Brillouin, vols. 1–7, Blackie and Sons, London (1928).
24. Louis de Broglie, “A Tentative Theory of Light Quanta,” excerpt from Philosophical
Magazine, vol. 47, p. 446 (1924); reprinted in I. Duck and E.C.G. Sudarshan, eds., 100
Years of Planck’s Quanta, chapter 4, World Scienti c, Singapore (2000), 128–141.
25. Louis de Broglie, “Studies on the Theory of Quanta,” PhD thesis, originally published in
Annales de Physique, vol. 3, p. 22 (1925).
26. Erwin Schrödinger collected nine of his seminal papers on the wave equation into a
volume titled Abhandlungen der Wellenmechanik (Treatise on Wave Mechanics), which
was originally published in 1927. These papers are available in English translation in
E. Schrödinger, Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics, Chelsea Publishing, New York
(1978). The nine papers are titled “Quantisation as a Problem of Proper Values, Parts I,
II, III, IV,” “The Continuous Transition from Micro-to Macro-Mechanics,” “On the
Relation between the Quantum Mechanics of Heisenberg, Born and Jordan, and That
of Schrödinger,” “The Compton E ect,” “The Energy-Momentum Theorem for Material
Waves,” and “The Exchange of Energy According to Wave Mechanics.” Note that the
term “proper value” was the chosen translation for the German term Eigenvalue, which
has become standard mathematical terminology in English as well.

INDEX
Note: page numbers in italics refer to images.
Absolute units, 116
Absorption: energy, 185–186; light, 75–77, 270–271
Academic appointments of Einstein, 122–125, 130, 150–152, 165–167
Action, 88, 199–201; principle of least, 88, 200; quantum of, 80, 89, 99, 115, 132, 155,
177, 281
Adler, Friedrich, 124
Angström, Knut, 117, 120
Annalen der Physik, 4, 26, 44, 46, 80, 88, 106, 266
Anschütz, Hermann, 212
Anti-Semitism, 151, 169, 206, 207–209, 211–212
Arrhenius, Svante Augustus, 111–117, 142, 212
Atomic theory, 37–38, 45–46, 113–114; Bohr’s, 172–179, 181–182; First Solvay Congress
and, 150. See also Quantum theory
Atomic vibration, 104, 106–110, 178
Atoms, 81, 107–108, 112; energy absorption, 185–186, 270–271; light absorption, 75–77,
270–271; random behavior by, 232–234, 284; vibration, 108–110, 145, 178, 248–250
Autobiographical notes of Einstein, 279–280, 285
Avogadro’s number, 39, 87, 113–114, 115
Bertel, Annemarie, 258
Besso, Michele, 48, 65–66, 73; correspondence with Einstein, 130, 156, 163, 182–183, 188,
194–196, 201, 271–273
Blackbody radiation, 56–58, 70–74, 91, 108, 138; Einstein’s quantum theory of, 184–185;
frequency and, 97–98, 293; Kircho ’s law and, 291. See also Laws of thermal radiation;
Thermal radiation
Bohr, Niels, 156, 170–174, 181, 199, 220, 274, 280, 283–284; atomic theory, 172–179,
181–182; de Broglie and, 245; Einstein on, 179–180, 283; Heisenberg and, 268, 269–270;
Schrödinger and, 255, 258, 263, 268, 274; theory of spectra and, 184–186
Bohr-Sommerfeld theory, 170–174, 183–184, 199–201, 249, 256, 259–260, 266, 270
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 6, 14, 17, 33, 44, 45, 55, 73, 125, 223; death of, 259; Einstein on, 36,
38, 46, 47; equation for entropy, 51–52, 56, 58, 68, 91, 115, 154, 288; Newtonian
mechanics and, 42; Third Law of thermodynamics and, 144–145; tomb of, 51, 52
Boltzmann’s constant, 51, 68, 91, 115, 154, 293

Born, Max, 20, 49, 136, 141, 162, 211, 255, 280–281, 285; ghost elds and, 198–199;
Heisenberg and, 269, 271; interpretation of the wave function, 198, 274–277; Pauli and,
269; reverence for Einstein, 269; Schrödinger and, 274, 277
Bose, Satyendra Nath, 215, 228, 245, 253, 274; academic appointments of, 218;
correspondence with Einstein, 215–216; derivation of Planck’s law, 219–224; education
of, 217–218; Einstein’s critique of second paper by, 225; Einstein’s endorsement of rst
paper by, 216, 229–230; in uence on Einstein, 229–232; in uence on physics, 217; on
new quantum mechanics, 272; second paper of, 224; visit to Europe, 225–227;
Bose-Einstein condensation, 233–238, 249, 256, 260, 261, 279, 282
Boson, 217; Higgs boson, 217
Bothe, Walter, 211; experiment with Geiger on Compton E ect, 283–284
Boyle’s Law, 38, 221
Brillouin, Leon, 244
Brownian motion, 39, 259
Bucherer, Alfred, 141
Calculus, 28
Caltech, 197
Cartan, Elie, 250
Children of Albert Einstein, 86, 87, 152, 167
Classical physics, 27–30, 171
Clausius, Rudolph, 42, 51, 113
Cleve, Per Theodor, 112
Compton, Arthur Holly, 283
Compton e ect, 283–284
Coulomb, Charles Augustin de, 30
Curie, Marie, 149, 157, 226
De Broglie, Louis, 240, 241, 264, 280; Einstein on, 241–242, 251; family of, 242–243;
Nobel prize, 252; Solvay Congress of 1911 and, 244; theoretical physics and, 244–245;
theory on light quanta, 245–247; wave-particle duality, 247–250
De Broglie, Maurice, 242, 243–244, 245, 250
De Broglie, Pauline, 243
De Broglie wavelength, 252
Debye, Peter, 103, 229
Degenhart, Joseph, 17
De Haas, Wander J., 162
Determinism in quantum mechanics, 277
Diamond, 104–105
Dice, 232–234, 284–285
Di usion, 39
Dirac, Paul, 162, 256
Doppler e ect, 190–191, 210–211

Drude, Paul, 44–45, 71, 73, 108
Dulong, Pierre, 103–104
Dulong-Petit law, 103–108
Dynamical Theory of Gases, 99
Dyson, Frank, 205
Eddington, Arthur Stanley, 204–205
Edison, Thomas, 143–144
Ehrat, Jakob, 22
Ehrenfest, Paul, 72, 167, 194, 195, 197, 211, 224, 231, 271, 273; Bose statistics and, 238;
ultraviolet catastrophe and, 72
Einstein, Albert, 14, 153; academic appointments of, 122–125, 130, 150–151;
accomplishments of, 279–282; anti-Semitism and, 151, 169, 206, 207–209, 211–212;
autobiographical notes by, 279–280, 285; in Berlin, Germany, 165–167; in Bern,
Switzerland, 46–48, 62–66, 122–123; on blackbody radiation, 70–74, 184–187, 284–285;
on Bohr, 180, 283; on Boltzmann, 36, 38, 46; Born and, 285; Bose and, 215–227, 229–
230, 281–282; on Brownian motion, 39, 259; children of, 86, 87, 152, 167;
correspondence with Besso, 130, 156, 163, 182–183, 188, 194–196, 201, 271–273; on de
Broglie, 241–242, 251; dislike of quantum theory, 1–2, 277; divorce from Mileva Maric,
194–196; on Drude, 44; early work in theoretical physics, 26–27; early work on relativity
theory, 3–4, 151, 161; Elsa Einstein and, 164–165, 193, 210; on energy quantization using
Planck’s resonators, 91–92; on ether, 83–85; fame of, 205–207, 216; rst published work
on atomic theory, 45–46; formal education of, 15–20, 46–47; “fusion” theory of light,
137–138; on Gibbs, 50; health of, 193–196; heuristic point of view on light, 70–79; on
idea gas law, 230–238; in uence of Maxwell on, 34–35, 50, 84–85, 153; in uence of
Nernst on, 146–148, 154, 163–164, 228; in uence of Newton on, 29, 35; interest in
quantum theory, 3, 125–128, 183–184; Jewish identity of, 208–209; Lorentz and, 50,
130–135, 153–154, 167, 194, 197; on matrix mechanics, 271–3; Mileva Maric and, 48,
62, 63, 129–130, 152, 164–165; Anna Meyer-Schmid and, 129–130; Nobel prize won by,
282; Olympia Academy and, 63–66, 212; papers on First and Second Laws of
thermodynamics, 48–49; parents of, 24–25; peers and friends in Bern, 63–66; PhD thesis,
46–47; on Planck, 26–27, 73–74, 285; Planck’s response to theory of light quanta, 80–81;
Planck’s support for special theory of relativity and, 88–89; in Prague, Bohemia, AustroHungarian Empire, 152; probabilistic interpretation of wavefunction and, 276, 282; as a
prodigy, 15–16; quantum ideal gas and, 230–232, 235–238; on radioactive decay, 182–
183; reputation among his peers, 21–23; rise in stature of, 150–152; Rubens on, 208;
Schrödinger and, 238–240, 254–267; sliding mirror thought experiment, 138–139, 189;
Ernest Solvay and, 149–150, 156–158; Sommerfeld and, 125–126, 184; A. Douglas Stone’s
interest in, 2–3; teaching career of, 44–45, 47, 63, 122; time dilation and, 248; travel
around the world, 209–210, 212–213; on wave function in q-space, 275–276; Heinrich
Weber and, 15–20, 26, 35, 103, 152; during World War I, 168–170, 193–194, 204. See
also Quantum theory; Theory of relativity
Einstein, Eduard, 152
Einstein, Elsa, 164–165, 193, 194–196, 210
Einstein, Hans Albert, 86

Einstein, Mileva Maric, 4, 16, 20, 22, 167; children of, 86, 87, 152, 167; divorce from
Einstein, 194–196; early relationship with Einstein, 23–25; Einsteins’ correspondence
with, 26–27, 36, 44, 46, 47, 106; marriage to Einstein, 48, 62, 63, 129–130, 152, 164–
165; move to Berlin, 167
Electromagnetic (EM) radiation, 7–8, 42; blackbody, 56–60, 70–74, 78–79, 91, 97–98, 108,
138, 184–185, 291; Boltzmann’s principle and, 56–58; conservation of energy and, 74–75;
Einstein’s struggles with quantum theory of, 153–156; frequency and, 97–98; gas
molecules’ interaction with, 189–190; Maxwell’s work on, 33–34, 83; Planck’s constant
and, 154–155; Rayleigh-Jeans law and, 100–102, 119–120, 292; thermal radiation law,
291, 293–294; visible, 11–12, 113–119; wavelengths, 72–73; waves, 81–85; Wien law
and, 94–99, 292. See also Maxwell’s equations; Planck’s law
Electrons, 45, 81; orbital frequencies, 174–178, 183–184; orbits, 200–202; photoelectric
e ect and, 78–79; wavefunction, 265–267, 275–276
Elementary Principles of Statistical Mechanics, 49
Elsasser, Walter, 252
“Emission and Absorption of Radiation in Quantum Theory,” 184–185
Emission of light: directed, 192; Einstein’s awed experiment on, 210–211; spontaneous,
186, 224–225; stimulated 187, 224–225
Emission theory of light, 137
Energy: Dulong-Petit law, 103–108; emission and, 137, 186–187; uctuations, 250–251;
free, 49; frequency and, 68–69, 72; ground state, 185–186, 229; linear oscillator and,
174–175; orbital, 174–178; peak frequency and, 95–96; photoelectric e ect and, 78–79;
potential, 68–69, 265–266; quantization of, 97–98, 106–110, 131–132, 219–224, 264–
265; Rayleigh-Jeans law, 100–102, 119–120; temperature and, 38, 96; thermal, 67–68;
ultraviolet catastrophe and, 72, 98–102, 99–100, 102; Wien law and, 94–99
Entropy, 42, 51–55, 67, 238; additivity of, 238; blackbody radiation and, 56–60, 74;
Boltzmann’s equation for, 51–2, 56, 58, 68, 91, 115, 154, 288; Bose on, 220–222;
calculations using Planck’s resonators, 91–92; chance and, 232–233; Second Law of
thermodynamics and, 10, 41, 54, 56, 57; thermal equilibrium and, 7, 100–102, 140, 185–
186, 189, 224, 250, 291; Third Law of thermodynamics and, 144, 238
Epstein, Paul, 136, 140, 201, 275
Equilibrium, thermal, 185–186
Ether, the, 83–85, 99–100, 132
Failure of Planck-Wien Law, 9–11
Fan waves, 81–82
Faraday, Michael, 26, 30–31, 34–35
Faraday’s Law, 30–31, 32
Fermi, Enrico, 269
Feynman, Richard, 5, 34
First Law of thermodynamics, 41, 48–49
Fischer, Emil, 143–144, 151
Fluctuations, energy, 250–251
Force, uctuating, 191

Force-carrying particle. See Photons
Formal education of Einstein, 15–20, 46–47
Franck, James, 276
Frank, Philipp, 159, 166–167
Fredholm, Ivar, 114, 121
Free energy, 49
Freezing, quantum, 144–145
Frequency, 68–69, 72, 75–76, 293; electron orbital, 174–178, 183–184; low, 98–99; peak,
95–96; rest, 248; transition, 270–271
Friction, 190
Fundamental constants, 116–117
Fusion theory of light, 137–138, 281
Galileo Galilei, 29, 89
Games of chance, 232–234
Gas(es): Boltzmann’s constant and, 51–55; Boyle’s Law and, 38, 221; ideal gas law, 221,
230–238, 261; interaction with radiation, 189–190; molecular motion, 39–41, 51–55;
particles, 81, 96; photon gas, 221–223, 230; pressure, 38; quantum ideal, 229, 230–232,
235–238. See also Energy
Geiger, Hans, 211, 283–284; experiment on atomic nucleus, 172; experiment with Bothe on
Compton E ect, 283; experiment on elementary charge, 114, 138;
General theory of relativity, 84, 123, 161, 183, 207; Einstein’s struggle with, 283;
equivalence principle and, 123; expedition to test, 204; reaction to, 162, 205. See also
Theory of relativity
German Physical Society, 5, 8, 10–11, 12–13, 179, 201
Ghost elds, 198–199, 276
Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 49–50, 51, 56, 91, 95, 259
Gladstone, William, 31
Gordon, Walter, 273
Gravitational attraction, 232
Gravitational constant, 154
Gravity, 28–29, 30, 160
Grossman, Marcel, 20, 21–22, 45
Ground state, 185–186, 229
Haber, Clara, 169, 209
Haber, Fritz, 145, 163–164, 165; World War I and, 168, 169
Habicht, Conrad, 63–67, 84
Harmonic oscillation, 199–200, 270
Hartog, P. J., 218
Hasenohrl, Fritz, 259
Health of Einstein, 193–196

Heat: entropy, 42, 51–55; laws of thermodynamics and, 9–10, 41; Planck’s work on light
and, 5, 6–7; speci c, 97, 103–110, 141, 146–147
Heisenberg, Werner, 212, 226, 238, 255, 268–269, 284; Bohr and, 268, 269–270; Born on,
269; discovery of uncertainty principle, 278; on light absorption, 270–271; matrix
mechanics of, 272–274; nomination for Nobel prize, 280; on transition frequencies, 270–
271
Hertz, Heinrich, 77–78, 83
Herzog, Albin, 15
Hevesy, George, 146, 179
Higgs boson, 217
Hilbert, David, 158–159
Hurwitz, Adolf, 19, 166
Ideal gas law, 221, 229–230; Einstein on, 230–238; Schrödinger and, 261–263
Intelligent design, 42–43
Japan, Einstein’s visit to, 212–213
Jaumann, Gustav, 151
Jeans, James Hopwood, 10–11, 99–102, 126–127, 131, 292; Dynamical Theory of Gases, 99;
Solvay and, 149
Jewish identity of Einstein, 208–209
Jordan, Pascual, 192, 255, 271, 272
Kallmann, Hartmut, 273
Kamerlingh-Onnes, Maryke, 195
Kelvin, Lord, 76–77, 95, 171
Kircho , Gustav, 25
Kircho ’s law, 291
Kleiner, Alfred, 46–47, 124
Kurlbaum, Ferdinand, 5, 8, 11–12, 58, 99, 143
Langevin, Paul, 157, 225, 241–242, 249–250
Langmuir, Irving, 143–144
Laplace, Pierre Simon de, 29, 40, 42
Laub, Jakob, 122, 124–125, 133, 153
Laws of thermal radiation: mathematical statement of radiation laws, 293–294; overview of
radiation laws, 291–292; Planck’s law, 5, 8, 51, 74, 134, 196, 292; Planck-Wien Law, 5, 8,
9–12, 58 (see also Wien’s law this entry); Rayleigh-Jeans Law, 100, 119–120, 125, 220,
288, 291–294; Stefan-Boltzmann Law, 72–73 101; Wien’s law, 9, 11, 58, 74, 94–99, 246,
287, 292–294. See also Blackbody radiation; Thermal radiation
Lectures on the Theory of Gases, 36
Lenard, Philip, 79, 135, 207–208
Light: absorption, 75–77, 270–271; Bose on quantum properties of, 219–224, 228; De
Broglie’s theory on, 245–247; Einstein’s “fusion” theory of, 137; Einstein’s heuristic point

of view on, 70–79; Einstein’s paper on quanta of, 67–69, 281; emission theory of, 137;
and the ether, 83–85; ghost elds and, 198–199, 209–211; laws of thermodynamics and,
9–10; Maxwell’s wave theory of, 70; Nernst lamp and, 143–144; photoelectric e ect, 78–
79; Planck’s response to Einstein’s heuristic theory of, 80–81; Planck’s study of, 5, 6–7;
stimulated emission of, 186, 224–225; spontaneous emission of, 186, 224–225; Stokes
rule, 76–77; wave frequency, 75–76; wave theory of, 70, 83, 137. See also Electromagnetic
(EM) radiation; Quantum theory
Light quanta, 122, 125, 187, 217, 226, 228, 272, 279; blackbody law and, 74, 88; Bose’s
method of counting, 233; De Broglie on, 245, 247, 250, 252; Einstein’s correspondence
with Lorentz regarding, 134–135, 174; Einstein’s work on, 84–85, 221; force of radiation
and, 139; fusion theory of, 137; ghost elds and, 209–210; photoelectric e ect and, 78;
Planck on, 80, 90–91, 93, 127; particulate concept of, 182, 196; pointlike energy packets
of light and, 132; radiation properties and, 153–155, 192, 198; speci c heat and, 106,
148; ultraviolet catastrophe and, 97, 101. See also Photons
Linear oscillator, 174–175, 187
Lippmann, Gabriel, 121
Liquids, 39; Bose-Einstein condensation and, 237–238
Lorentz, Hendrik, 14, 50, 80–81, 84, 89, 118–121, 125, 126, 158, 192; Einstein’s
correspondence with, 130–135, 153–154, 167, 194, 197, 241; on ghost elds, 198;
opinion of Einstein, 123–124; opinion of Einstein’s Relativity Theory, 118; on Planck’s
formula, 92; on quantum theory and classical physics, 171–172, 173; Solvay Congress
and, 149–150, 171–172
Loschmidt, Josef, 38
Lyman, Theodore, 178
Mach, Ernst, 116, 255
Magnetism, 30–31, 33
Mauguin, Charles, 250
Maric, Mileva. See Einstein, Mileva
Maric Maric, Milos, 23
Markwalder, Stephanie, 21–22
Markwalder, Suzanne, 21–22
Marsden, Ernest, 172
Mass, 30–31, 245–246
Massless nature of photons, 155–156, 265
Matrix mechanics, 271–274, 280, 289; Einstein’s opinion of, 271–272; equivalence to wave
mechanics, 273
Matter, 30
Matter waves, 265, 274–277
Maxwell, James Clerk, 6, 12–14, 17, 45, 48–49, 51, 54, 89, 102, 104, 132, 140, 259; on
atomic theory, 37–38; Einstein’s study of, 36, 84–85, 153; Faraday’s law and, 32–33;
in uence on Einstein, 50; on intelligent design, 42–43; on movement of molecules, 38–39;
Newtonian mechanics and, 42; philosophy of science, 31–32; on Queen Victoria, 32; on

Second Law of thermodynamics, 55; statistical mechanics and, 40–42; wave theory of
light, 70, 83; wealth of, 165
Maxwell-Boltzmann theory, 38
Maxwell’s Demon, 55
Maxwell’s equations: Boltzmann on, 33; Einstein on, 35; Lorentz on, 35; quantum theory
and, 154–156, 197; Schrödinger and, 263, 265; signi cance of, 34–5
McCarthy, Eugene, 227
Metals, atomic properties of, 45
Meyer, George, 129
Meyer-Schmid, Anna, 129–130
Millikan, Robert, 142, 213
Minkowski, Hermann, 17, 19, 20, 123–124, 136
Mittag-Le er, Gosta, 121
Molecules: Doppler e ect, 190–191; Einstein’s hypothesis on atomic theory and, 45–46;
entropy, 51–55, 74; gas, 39–41; light absorption, 75–77; movement of, 38–40; potential
energy, 68–69; resonator, 91–93
Mookerjee, Asutosh, 218
Motion: Boltzmann’s constant and gas, 51–55; di usion, 39; Doppler e ect, 190–191;
molecular, 38–40, 51–55; Newton’s laws of, 27–30, 32; periodic, 174–175 theory of
relativity and, 161
Nature, 100
Nernst, Walther, 141–143, 272, 281; character of, 142–143; in uence on Einstein, 146–
148, 154, 163–165, 228; opinion on diamond experiment, 106; opinion on Einstein, 141;
opinion on General Relativity, 181; Solvay and, 149–150; Third Law of thermodynamics,
144–145, 238 (see also Nernst’s Law); work of, 141–148, 157, 165, 174, 208, 228–229;
World War I and, 168, 169
Nernst lamp, 143–144
Nernst’s law, 145–146, 238
Neutrons, 81
Newton, Isaac, 6, 12, 13, 17, 34–35, 46, 89, 205; in uence on Einstein, 35
Newtonian mechanics, 27–30, 42, 81, 97, 106, 152, 154, 163, 200
Newton’s First Law, 28, 60
Newton’s Second Law, 28, 30, 32
New York Times, 205
Nicolai, George, 168
Nobel prizes, 111, 113–114, 117–118, 144, 170, 195, 212–213, 252; Einstein’s nominations
of Heisenberg and Schrödinger for, 280; won by Einstein, 282
Non-linear processes with photons, 76
Olympia Academy, 63–66, 212
“On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light,” 67
“On Einstein’s Gas Theory,” 262

Onnes, H. K., 149, 229
“On the Development of Our Views concerning the Nature and Constitution of Radiation,”
136
“On the Present Status of the Radiation Problem,” 126–127
“On the Quantum Theorem of Sommerfeld and Epstein,” 201
“On the Quantum Theory of Radiation,” 188
Orbital energy, 174–178, 183–184, 200–202
Oscillation: harmonic, 199–200, 270; Heisenberg on, 270–271; linear, 174–175, 187;
Schrödinger on, 275–276
Ostwald, Wilhelm, 113, 142
Particles, 81, 96, 137, 284; Bose on, 221–222; de Broglie on, 247–249; energy uctuations
and, 250–251; Nernst’s heat theorem for, 228–229; principle of least action, 200
Paschen, Friedrich, 184
Patent o ce, Bern, 46–47, 62–63, 66, 122–123
Pauli, Wolfgang, 136, 238, 255, 269, 271, 273
Peak frequency, 95–96
Periodic motion, 174–175
Pernet, Jean, 18
Perrin, Jean, 40, 142, 149, 157, 250
Petit, Alex, 103–104
Philosophical Magazine, 215, 218
Photoelectric e ect, 78–79, 213
Photons, 71, 75, 155–156, 182, 193, 221–223, 230, 281; bosonic nature of, 217; de Broglie
on, 245–246; gas of, 221–223, 230; ghost elds and, 276; lack of deterministic laws for,
198; massless nature of, 155–156, 265; non-linear processes with, 76; Planck on, 80, 140.
See also Light quanta
Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt, 165
Pickering, E. C., 178
Pickering-Fowler spectrum, 178–179
Planck, Max, 4, 67, 71, 124, 127, 146, 147, 164, 165, 192, 213, 229, 255, 272, 274, 281,
292; blackbody radiation and, 56–60; Boltzmann’s principle and, 56–58; de Broglie on,
244; Einstein’s thoughts on, 26–27, 73–74, 285; on fundamental constants, 116–117;
German Physical Society and, 5, 8, 10–13; Nobel prize, 113–114; response to Einstein’s
heuristic theory of light quanta, 80–81; Solvay and, 149; support for Einstein’s special
theory of relativity, 88–89; as a theoretical physicist, 5–6, 13–14; on theory of relativity,
151; World War I and, 168
Planck’s constant, 79, 111, 116–117, 154–155, 174, 200, 247; electron orbital frequencies
and, 176; rest frequency and, 248
Planck’s law, 5, 8, 51, 74, 134, 196, 292; Born’s derivation of, 219–224; Bose on, 219–224,
228; de Broglie and, 246–247; Einstein’s thoughts on, 26–27, 90–91; uctuating force
and, 191; “fusion” theory of light and, 137–138; Planck’s presentation of, 10–11, 12–13;
quantum theory and, 187–189; Lord Rayleigh on, 94–99; Rayleigh-Jeans law and, 100–
102; Second Law of thermodynamics and, 9–11; visible EM radiation and, 11–12

“Planck’s Law and the Quantum Hypothesis,” 219
Planck’s radiation law, 11–12, 113–119
“Planck’s Theory of Radiation and the Theory of Speci c Heat,” 106
Planck-Wien Law. See Laws of thermal radiation
Poincaré, Henri, 84, 149
Potential energy, 68–69, 265–266
Pressure, gas, 38, 139
Principle of least action, 88, 200
Probability density, 276, 282
Protons, 81, 115–116
Prussian Academy of Sciences, 166, 181, 213, 229, 235, 262
Quanta of Light. See Light quanta; Photons
Quantization of energy, 97–98, 106–110, 131–132, 281; Bohr-Sommerfeld rule, 170–174;
Einstein and, 107, 200–202; Heisenberg and, 270–271; Planck and, 60–61; Schrödinger
and, 263–265
Quantum chaos theory, 202–203
Quantum freezing, 144–145
Quantum ideal gas, 229, 231–232, 235–238
Quantum mechanics, 268, 281; de Broglie and, 253; determinism in, 277; Einstein’s dislike
of, 1–2, 277; Nernst’s heat theorem and, 228–229; signi cance of, 2
“Quantum Mechanics of Collision Phenomena,” 276
Quantum theory, 3, 125–128, 162–163, 193, 212–213, 280–281; blackbody law and, 184–
185; Bose-Einstein condensation and, 233–238; directed process in, 189–192; Einstein’s
commitment to, 160–161, 183–184; Einstein’s struggles with, 153–156; ghost elds and,
198–199; ideal gas and, 226; Lorentz on, 171–172, 173; Maxwell’s equations and, 154–
156; Nernst and, 147–148, 152–153, 228–229; Planck’s law and, 187–189; thermal
equilibrium and, 185–186. See also Atomic theory; Quantum mechanics
“Quantum Theory of the Monatomic Ideal Gas,” 229–230
Radiation. See Electromagnetic (EM) radiation
Radioactive decay, 182–183
Radioactivity, 46
Rathenau, Walter, 211–212
Rayleigh, Lord, 93, 94, 104, 108, 165, 172, 292; Wien law and, 93, 94
Rayleigh-Jeans law, 100–102, 119–120, 125, 220, 288, 291–294
Reiche, Fritz, 136
“Remarks on the Statistical De nition of Entropy for the Ideal Gas,” 261
Rest frequency, 248
Revue Philosophique, 66
Ritz, Walter, 127
Rome Congress of Mathematicians, 124
Routh, E. J., 94

Rubens, Heinrich, 5, 8, 11–12, 58, 98–99, 136, 143, 148, 164; on Einstein’s work, 208;
Solvay and, 149
Rutherford, Ernest, 114, 149, 170–173
Rydberg, Johannes, 177
Saha, Meghnad, 218
Schrödinger, Erwin, 155, 238–240, 253, 254, 284; academic appointments of, 254–255;
Bose statistics and, 238–240, 260–61; Born and, 274, 277; on directed matter waves, 276–
277; formal education of, 257–259; Heisenberg and, 272–274; on ideal gases, 261–263;
nomination for Nobel prize, 280; relationships with women, 256; research style, 259–260;
wave equation, 254, 256, 263–267; on wavefunction, 275–276
Second Law of thermodynamics, 9–11, 41, 48–49, 54–56; blackbody radiation and, 56–60;
Maxwell and, 55
Sliding mirror thought experiment, 138–139, 189
Solids, 103–108, 145; atomic vibration and, 108–110; Bose-Einstein condensation and,
237–238
Solovine, Maurice, 63–66, 64, 86
Solvay, Ernest, 149–150, 156–158
Solvay Congress of 1911, 149–152, 156–158, 169–172, 242, 244
Sommerfeld, Arnold, 125–126, 136, 153–154, 163, 174, 199, 207, 229, 251, 255, 259; ne
structures and, 183; on electron orbital frequency, 183–184; on orbital energy, 200–201;
Schrödinger and, 263, 274; Solvay and, 158–159
Speci c heat, 97, 103–110, 141, 146–147
Stark, Johannes, 135–136, 140, 174
Statistical mechanics, 40–42, 48, 90, 259; Boltzmann’s principle and, 56–58; Einstein’s
papers on, 67–69; free energy and, 49; Maxwell on, 40
Stefan-Boltzmann law, 72–73, 101
Stern, Otto, 3, 183
Stimulated emission, 186–187, 224–225
Stodola, Aurel, 166
Stokes, George Gabriel, 76–77, 95
Stokes rule, 76–77
Strutt, John William. See Rayleigh, Lord
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), 163, 166, 167
Tanner, Hans, 146
Temperature, 38, 96; ideal gas law and, 235–236; quantum freezing and, 144–145
Thalen, Tobias, 112
Theoretical physics, 5–6, 13–14, 61, 278; de Broglie and, 244–245; Einstein’s early work in,
26–27; Schrödinger and, 266–267
Theory of relativity, 3–4; attacks on, 206–207; Einstein’s early thoughts on, 126–128, 161;
Einstein’s fame from, 205–207; as “elementary” theory, 126–128; internal contradictions,
280; Nobel committee and, 212–213; Planck on, 151; time dilation and, 248. See also
General theory of relativity

Theory of Sound, The, 94
Thermal energy, 67–68
Thermal equilibrium, 7, 100–102, 140, 185–186, 189, 224, 250, 291
“Thermal Equilibrium of the Radiation Field in the Presence of Matter,” 224
Thermal radiation, 291, 293–294. See also Blackbody radiation; Laws of thermal radiation
Thermodynamics, laws of, 9–11, 41; black-body radiation and, 56–60; Boltzmann’s constant
and, 54–55; Einstein’s light-quanta hypothesis and, 74–75, 281; Einstein’s papers on, 48–
49; Maxwell’s demons and, 55–56; Nernst and, 144–145, 238; ultraviolet catastrophe and,
72, 98–102
Third Law of thermodynamics, 144–145, 238, 281
Thirring, Hans, 257
Thomson, J. J., 45, 95, 115, 118, 162, 170–172, 205
Thomson, William. See Kelvin, Lord
Time dilation, 248
Transition frequencies, 270–271
Trinity College, 94
Uhland, Ludwig, 4
Ultraviolet catastrophe, 72–73, 90–93, 97–102, 172, 288
University of Bern, 123
University of Zurich, 46, 122, 124, 130, 150
Valiant Swabian, the, 4, 44
Van ‘t Ho , Jacobus Henricus, 113
Velocity, 161
Vibration, atomic, 104, 106–110, 178; de Broglie on, 248–250
Victoria, Queen, 32
Volume, gas, 38
Von Laue, Max, 136, 208, 211
Warburg, Emil, 164
Waves: de Broglie and, 247–250, 252; direct matter, 276–277; as disturbances, 83, 265;
matter, 265, 274–275; probability density, 276; in q-space, 275–276; Schrödinger and,
254, 256, 262–263; wave theory of light, 70, 81–85, 83, 137, 138–139
Weber, Heinrich, 15–20, 26, 35, 46, 103–106, 152
Weimar Republic, 206
Weizmann, Chaim, 209
Weyland, Paul, 206–207
Whitehead, Alfred North, 205
Wien, Wilhelm, 94–99, 120, 136, 149, 213, 272, 274, 292, 293. See also Planck’s law
Wien’s law, 9, 11, 58, 74, 94–99, 246, 287, 292–294
Wigner, Eugene, 198
Winteler, Anna, 66

Winteler, Jost, 44
Winteler, Marie, 23, 24
World War I, 168–170, 193–194, 204
World Zionist Organization, 209
Yale University, 49
Zangger, Heinrich, 167, 194, 196, 206
Zeeman, Pieter, 118
Zeeman e ect, 118
Zeitschrift für Physik, 216
Zurich Polytechnic, 4, 15–20, 21, 24, 146

